Twas a Sunday morning when I woke up, happy and ready for the day, when suddenly your
access to YouTube has been suspended.
Why?
Because of a perceived violation of the terms of service.
Really?
What could I have possibly done?
Irrelevant!
YouTube reserves the right to germinate your account at any time for any reason.
Was this helpful?
Yes, no.
This messenger from Olympus had reminded me that we are all but homunculi at the whims
of a capricious algorithmic god.
Which is useful to keep in mind.
So yes, technically, but I wasn't happy with the gods, so I did what any brave hero
would do.
Towards Olympus, I tweeted.
Alas, it was the weekend and there was no one to hear my chirping.
All was despair.
Now, you're able to watch this video because I did, when the work week started, eventually
make it through the system.
To discover YouTube had suspended my account for impersonation of me.
Which was a bit… what?
Maybe the YouTube bots thought my verified channel was acting a bit too bot-like, which
is ridiculous, so they shut it down.
But I may never know.
Anyway, I'm here reciting this hero's ballad as a reminder to everyone who makes things
on a platform that the gods are arbitrary and their rules of who can speak from Olympus
are but words of whimsy on the wind.
And follow them or not, you may be knocked off at any time for any reason.
There is only one of the ancient sleepy titans left from the pre-web days whose indifference
to all allows all upon his mountain.
E-mail.
Though his son, Gmail, sure is trying to dethrone him, but the titan still holds on.
For now at least.
What I'm saying is, if you're a creator, I strongly suggest you get yourself an email
list.
If you're a viewer who likes the videos I make, consider signing up for my email list.
There's about 100,000 of you already there, which is amazing.
But also, far short of the millions of you here, that YouTube says it very diligently
and very reliably notifies about my videos.
So before you watch the newest one, which I'm sure you got notified for, please consider
clicking here and joining my email list.
While you're doing that, I'm going to work on my next video, and also prepare a
sacrifice to the gods to pray they don't smite me again before it's done.
