People who purport to speak on behalf of science
and then defend the corruption of science for political gain
need to be exposed as the political demagogues that they are.
And of course I'm talking about Potholer 54.
Political demagogue? Moi? Ooh.
I have to say my channel has always steered well clear of politics
and if I am pushing a political point I'm doing a
pretty shitty job of it because no one seems to know what my politics are.
Several people have taken a guess but they've all been wrong.
The reason I don't proclaim my politics is that this is a channel
about science and far from defending the corruption of science
just about every video I put out is attacking the corruption of science
and so is this one. Now while some of you may think that scientific facts
are dependent on politics, funnily enough they're not.
But of course that doesn't stop politicians from trying to invent
a version of science that fits their own political, religious or ideological preferences.
I'm sure we all remember this famous nugget from Sarah Palin
on the subject of fruit fly research.
Sometimes these dollars they go to projects having little or nothing to do with the public good.
Things like fruit fly research in Paris, France. I kid you not.
Just in case you haven't heard this before, I should point out that fruit flies
are specially bred for studying everything from viruses and diseases
to genetics and medical treatments. It's hard to find
any research more geared towards the public good.
So with that benchmark of stupidity to beat
let's look at some of the stupidest and funniest
scientific conclusions made by politicians.
Yes we are going to start with the low-hanging fruit.
President Robert Mugabe gave us this insight into Zimbabwean politics
when he believed a woman who said she could conjure diesel from a rock.
In 2007 he dispatched three nicely dressed government ministers
to witness a demonstration and sure enough
they reported that it was all true. As you can imagine
crude oil, better yet refined diesel
oozing out of a rock would be the answer to Zimbabwe's fuel shortage.
So according to press reports Mugabe gave the woman a million dollars to
conjure up even more diesel
from other rocks. Now there are two possibilities here.
Either this is a magical process that could turn Zimbabwe into a net exporter
of diesel fuel for the whole continent
or it could be an elaborate hoax with a hole drilled into a rock leading to a
pump and a tank of diesel.
It's a toss-up. Hard to say either way.
Okay, turned out it was a tank of diesel being pumped through a man-made hole but
it could have been the answer to Zimbabwe's fuel shortage
so let's not make a complete donkey's arse out of President Mugabe.
We'll put his magic fuel from rocks idea
quite low on the list. Onto the next one. People outside the United States might
not be familiar with Congressman Todd
Akin who four years ago revealed to the world the amazing science that stops
rape victims getting pregnant. From what I understand from doctors
that's really rare. If it's a legitimate rape
the female body has ways to try to shut that whole thing down. Having failed to
explain the technicalities to one TV journalist
Akin tried it with another.
Stress plays some part in fertility. Perhaps you know some people they wanted
to have a
a child and they couldn't seem to do it so they adopt somebody and then pretty
soon
the woman gets pregnant because there isn't the stress.
Ah, I see. So the medical doctors you're quoting determined that a woman who was under
stress when she got raped
wouldn't get pregnant. Which means that those who did get pregnant either weren't
really raped
they made the whole thing up or they weren't under any stress when they were
raped
in other words they secretly enjoyed it. It's beginning to sound less like
something you learned from a medical study Todd
and more like something you heard in the locker room during football training in
high school.
Are you sure you don't want to have another shot at explaining this
scientific theory? I'm not setting myself up as a medical doctor or anything. Yeah, no shit.
And there are a whole series of studies. Great! Well
off you go and get them while I entertain my subscribers with a popular
selection of London Tea Room dance melodies.
Sorry, I can't wait any longer Todd.
You don't have any medical studies do you?
No, that's what I thought. So let's see if we can track this myth down.
His source was probably an obstetrician called John Wilkie
who first came up with this argument. He's written quite a bit about the
capacity of the female body to shut down a pregnancy when raped
and he told the New York Times how it's done. Now
he's an obstetrician so obviously an expert
and here's his study. An expert and a study.
Potholer I hear you cry. What more do you want? Well as I've pointed out many times
in my videos
science is not determined by the opinions of experts.
It's determined by what's been published in respected peer-reviewed scientific
journals
set against what else has been published in respected peer-reviewed scientific
journals.
And Wilkie doesn't even pass the first hurdle.
He may believe this stuff about spasming fallopian tubes
but belief is not science. He's never published any studies outlining his
research, his methodology,
his experiments, his sample sizes or anything
that would allow peer reviewers and other researchers to evaluate his conclusions.
This study isn't a study. It's something Wilkie published in a book.
Now you know why I'm always banging on about not believing the science you see
in books,
blogs, videos, newspapers and on TV unless they cite peer-reviewed scientific
papers published in respected scientific journals.
You could so easily end up with a jury believing that this nonsense is real
science
and acquitting a rapist on the grounds that his victim got pregnant.
Fortunately Aitken was booted out by voters before his wacky conclusions took
hold.
Thank goodness none of the other ideas on this list
are life-threatening. You see when you ask the question
does HIV cause AIDS?
The question is does a virus
cause a syndrome? Oh damn it South African President Thabo Mbeki
with this statement Mbeki took charge of a government
that promoted herbal remedies to treat people with AIDS
instead of retrovirals that might have saved their lives.
How does a virus cause a syndrome? Well perhaps if you read a medical
textbook or ask someone who's published studies on the subject
you'd find out but no Mbeki was getting his information
from the internet and the blogosphere is full of claims that HIV doesn't cause
AIDS
along with a coterie of experts to back them up. There's Peter Duisberg
a professor of molecular and cell biology and Kary Mullis who won a Nobel
Prize for his work in genetic PCR.
There's a group of doctors in Western Australia none of them believes
HIV causes AIDS. But once again winning a Nobel Prize or being a
distinguished professor
doesn't mean that any sound that emanates from your anal sphincter
must be a pearl of infallible scientific wisdom.
Most of these beliefs don't pass the first hurdle
because they're published in blogs rather than respected peer-reviewed
scientific journals.
And although Duisberg has published papers
they've been drowned out by the wealth of evidence coming from studies that show
a very
clear link between HIV and AIDS. It seemed to me that we could not blame
everything on a single virus. A Harvard study concluded that the South African
government's denial of the HIV AIDS link
led to the deaths of over 300,000 people
who didn't get the treatment they needed. When I was compiling this list I thought
some politician somewhere is going to be dumb enough to repeat the internet myth
that vaccines cause autism. So why not Google
vaccines, autism, politician and see what comes up.
Two and a half years old the child, a beautiful child, went to have the vaccine
and came back and a week later got a tremendous fever
got very very sick, now is autistic. Her little daughter
took that vaccine, that injection
and she suffered from mental retardation thereafter.
Yeah, you see the thing is it's sort of like me saying that last week my son had
the MMR vaccine
and a week later he finished first in the 100 meters race at school.
Obviously that would mean vaccines improve athletic performance.
Cause and effect need a correlation and that means taking large sample sizes
and analyzing statistics. Now there was a peer-reviewed study that purported to
show a link between vaccines and autism
so that passes the first hurdle. But it doesn't get past the second
because it was found to be heavily flawed, it was redacted
and every other study shows no link between the two.
So the only place you'll find this claim is where politicians do most of their
reading on science
which is the internet. I won't go into the details of why this is junk science
because you'll find a complete debunk of this
internet myth on my channel. And while we're on the subject to Michelle Backman
here's something else she had to say about science.
I don't think that it has been established yet as a fact
that global warming is the issue of the day.
One thing that we need to do
is look at the science. Funny because I thought looking at the science was the job of
scientists. It's not the job of politicians to look at the science for a
very good reason.
Very few of them have the time to read through the scientific literature
and even if they did they wouldn't understand it because few of them have
any scientific training at all. If you think I'm wrong just keep watching and
you'll see probably the most woeful examples of politicians trying to play
scientist
and showing just how ignorant they are. As far back as 1863
Congress realised that an understanding of the increasing complexity of science
was slipping beyond its cognitive grasp so it decided to establish an advisory
body of scientists.
It's called the National Academy of Sciences
and it's the Academy's job to explain scientific conclusions published in the
scientific literature
to politicians. But these days politicians don't want to hear that.
They think they're smart enough to figure it all out for themselves
even if that means getting all their information from blogs,
half-remembered junior high school science and going on a crash course in
remedial geology.
There have been these back and forth between
on glaciers and the melting that we've seen over and over again.
Why did it happen then if the same factors that you're blaming it on didn't
exist then?
I can give you as much or as little answers that you would like.
Give me 15 seconds. Okay give me 30 if I may.
Yep, you've got 30 seconds to educate me in a field of science that usually
requires a three-year degree
and a basic understanding of physics which I don't have.
And so Richard Alley has to explain the Milankovitch cycles and the concept of
insulation and positive feedback using his head and his bald spot
to represent the Earth and the South Pole respectively.
And when the 30 seconds is up of course Senator Rohr and Bakker still doesn't
understand it
so it must all be wrong.
Let's leave the remedial class and see how politicians are getting on in the
other class
for those with learning difficulties. I live in Wisconsin.
There were two, I think 200 foot thick glaciers
in Wisconsin. How do you explain
the climate change before man ever had a carbon footprint?
The statement that you just made is blatantly false. How do you explain
climate change that occurred 10,000 years ago before man had a carbon
print? Which is science speak for
are you really that stupid? For anyone who thinks Senator Johnson makes a good
point
listen again. He's not making a point.
He doesn't accept the science so he's asking a question which he thinks will
have these researchers stumped.
If he really wants to know what causes glaciations all he has to do is read a
science book
or have a scientist come to his office and explain it or watch my video on the
800 year lag explained where I show that deglaciation was caused by a wobble in
the Earth's axis.
That caused a small increase in insulation in the southern hemisphere
which led to increased water vapour, lower albedo through melting ice
and the degassing of carbon dioxide which in turn
led to more warming. You're welcome Senator. So who else wants to turn a congressional
hearing into a remedial science lesson
by attempting to stump the teacher? Lead scientist at NASA said this
he said that what ended the ice age was global wobbling.
Is the wobbling of the earth included in any of your modeling?
And the answer was no. When you have a model and you say we're going to leave out the
most important impact of that model
out of our theory and not talk about global
wobbling, how can you make projections? Well Congressman it's like this
Global wobbling or the Milankovitch cycles as they're more commonly known
take place over the course of hundreds of thousands of years.
Their effect in the space of a few decades or a few centuries
is so minimal as to be totally ineffective.
But again Congressman Stockman's complete
ignorance on this subject is a given. It's not the point.
The point is he makes the assumption that the science must be wrong
and he's convinced his questions will have all these
know-it-all scientists stumped. They can't possibly have seen the flaw he spotted.
Oh wait, I've just been told that Stockman has managed to spot an even bigger flaw in the theory.
How long will it take for the sea level to rise two feet?
Think about it, if your ice cube melts in your glass it doesn't overflow, it's displacement.
This is the thing, some of the things that they're talking about mathematically and
scientifically
don't make sense.
I think what you mean Congressman is that they don't make sense to you.
And why should they? You're a politician with a bachelor's degree in accounting.
Don't assume that because it doesn't make sense to you
it doesn't make sense to anyone who studied science past tenth grade.
No, scratch that, even second grade kids understand it.
So it's hardly surprising that research glaciologists and oceanographers
spend their entire professional careers understanding it.
Now there is the teeniest possibility,
about the same odds of diesel coming out of a rock, that in the course of a
hundred years of research not one single oceanographer or glaciologist
realised that ice melting in a glass of water doesn't raise the level of water.
It's possible Congressman Stockman in his spare time has discovered something
completely unknown to science.
Or it's possible these oceanographers and glaciologists know something that
Stockman doesn't.
It's a toss-up. So instead of giving Congress the benefit of his theory
it might have been better to go over to the remedial class at the Committee of
Science, Space and Technology.
And Stockman could have asked why it makes sense to scientists and not to him.
He would have been told that melting ice already in the ocean
is not the cause of sea level rise. The cause of sea level rise is partly due to
ice melting on land and pouring into the oceans
to the tune of 150 cubic miles a year and partly due to the thermal expansion
of the oceans
as they warm up. The problem is that this failure to understand the science
not only leads these politicians to conclude that the science must be wrong,
they figure that the only way thousands of scientists can be wrong
is if they're all in on a conspiracy. And if there's a conspiracy
then the politicians can happily ignore the published science and make up their
own.
It's like a downward vortex of ignorance, stupidity, paranoia
and religious conviction. Now you would have thought that Stockman's
ice-in-a-glass theory would rank among the stupidest ever uttered by a politician.
It's got to be up there but there's a lot of competition.
The temperature on Mars is exactly as it is here.
Nobody will dispute that.
It could be secular. It could be just a shift on the axis.
The ice caps are melting which we see over and over again.
Yeah, they're melting on Mars too. One would have to say the Great Flood
is an example of climate change. Yes, he really
is talking about the well-known scientific fact
that Noah led all the animals two by two into an arc.
This is his crucial piece of evidence that carbon dioxide can't cause
atmospheric temperatures to rise.
And that certainly wasn't because mankind had overdeveloped
hydrocarbon energy. No, it was because an invisible being made it rain for
forty days and forty nights and flooded the entire world
and by the way left not a trace. Which brings me neatly onto the number one
wacky idea politicians have about science
that it's all bunk because we were in fact created
6,500 years ago.
I've come to understand that. All that stuff I was taught about evolution
and embryology and big bang theory
all that lies straight from the pit of hell.
Over the last hundred years geology, astronomy and biology have been under
attack
by American politicians who want to influence how these subjects are taught.
Not according to discoveries and conclusions published in the scientific
literature
which is how it's done in the rest of the world but according to the
politicians'
own beliefs. The battle began in the 1920s when several states
banned the teaching of evolution and it's still going on today
as they try to push creationism into science classes.
It's difficult to know how much this literal belief in creation
is fueling the anti-science movement among American politicians.
I never ascribe motivation because I can't read people's minds
but often they make the link themselves. Todd Akins remarks about rape victims
not getting pregnant
were used to justify refusing abortion to rape victims
and his strong anti-abortion views were in turn shaped by his religion.
This guy who was chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology
refused to accept that carbon dioxide affects atmospheric temperature because
because we can't control what God
does. Now I've restricted my list to the
English-speaking world and to advanced democracies but you might well ask
why are most of the people on Pottole's list conservative American politicians?
Yes! Good question! I'd like to know the answer to that too.
It's certainly not because Americans are dumb.
After all this is the land of technology and innovation
which has produced some of the greatest scientific minds of our age.
And it's certainly not because conservatives are scientifically illiterate.
Far from it. In other advanced democracies like
Europe and Japan conservatives are just as accepting of scientific conclusions
as
any other part of the political spectrum. I found examples of politicians on the
left fudging the science
that's in my videos but I haven't come across examples of them
refusing to accept the conclusions of researchers or trying to substitute
their own science.
So don't blame me. American conservatives themselves
see this as a battle between liberals, people on the left who accept the
published science
and conservatives who don't.
I've instinctively known this from the get-go from 20 years ago. The whole thing's made up.
And the reason I know it is because liberals are behind it.
Conservapedia thinks evolution, plate tectonics, black holes, dark matter
and just about anything in the realms of science are part of a liberal plot.
For politicians to echo these beliefs, well it's a situation that conservatives
in
other parts of the world find bizarre. Being a conservative means believing in
free markets
and minimising the role of government in the economy. It means defending individual
freedoms from the power of the state.
It means individual responsibility and accountability.
It means a lot of things that have been expounded in conservative creeds
from various think tanks and individuals. It
doesn't mean rejecting scientific conclusions
or making up scientific facts to suit your ideological or religious beliefs.
That's never been a conservative principle.
It could be just a shift on the axis. So here's my advice to American politicians
who don't seem to be on board with the bipartisan approach to science
adopted in other advanced democracies. Your job isn't to do a 30-second crash
course in a complex scientific subject
and when you don't understand it decide to make up your own science instead.
Your job is to decide what policies to implement
based on scientific conclusions that have been published in respected
peer-reviewed scientific journals. And if you don't know what those conclusions are
ask the scientists doing the research or the institutions that have been set up
to do the research
or the National Academy of Sciences that was set up to advise you
what those conclusions are. Don't have a scientific hearing
and call another politician as your only witness.
Don't ask busy researchers for a 30-second crash course in
basic physics so you can decide for yourself whether their conclusions are
right.
But as you sit there in your chair with your data we sit up here
with our data and the constituents and stuff behind us. You don't have the
basic scientific knowledge
or the time to understand it all.
Your job is not to pick and choose which bits of science you want to accept
based on your ideological or religious beliefs.
So if you don't want to impose a carbon tax
then vote against it. Don't use the excuse that the science doesn't make
sense to you
and therefore it must be wrong. And if you want to vote against legalising
abortion for rape victims
then be honest and vote for that. Don't invoke some scientific claptrap about how
women who get pregnant
haven't really been raped. And if you want kids to learn your religious
beliefs
fine! Be honest and vote for a bill that mandates that.
Don't give your religious beliefs some pseudo-scientific title
then pretend scientists are divided over the issue so that both sides need to be
taught in school.
In other words, don't make up your own science or hide behind pseudo-researchers
who've never published their beliefs
simply because real scientific conclusions might lead to a policy you
don't like.
