I don't know why so many people wrote in and asked me to respond to this latest exchange
between Christopher Monckton and Stefan Molyneux.
Molyneux seems quite capable of challenging Monckton's claims himself, because Molyneux
believes in looking at both sides of the issue.
I mean, there's nothing more boring than somebody who's only ever looked at evidence which supports
his or her own conclusions.
Look at the country evidence, and that will breed, I think, a very important and virtuous
humility.
Molyneux listens to Monckton, who represents the side that thinks it's all a conspiracy.
They are about to impose a communist world government on the world.
I'm sure he also listens to research scientists, who explain the evidence that carbon dioxide
has been the primary driver of global temperature for the last 500 million years, and the evidence
that a doubling of carbon dioxide from pre-industrial levels will lead to a temperature rise of
between 2 and 4.5 degrees centigrade.
So let's start with the side that thinks the whole thing's a conspiracy of greedy scientists,
who are perpetrating this hoax to impose a communist world government, or to get rich,
or whatever else that motivates them to write supposedly fraudulent papers.
Right, it's very simple.
The first serious predictions made based on what are called an ensemble of several models
taken together were done by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
The rate of global warming is not much more than half of what they originally predicted.
Well, to use the scientific form of rebuttal, that's complete bollocks.
The 1990 prediction was the first by the IPCC, and quite crude.
It only looked at warming caused by greenhouse gases.
So short-term and unpredictable variables, like fluctuating solar output and aerosol
pollution, weren't considered.
So if we look at what the IPCC was actually predicting, the temperature trend due to greenhouse
gases, which is the light blue line in this graph, is bang on target.
I bet someone is already typing out a post to say, what good are predictions if they
can't take short-term variables into account?
Well, the answer is that short-term variables are, by definition, short-term.
And they're variable.
They go up and down over a period of a few years.
So they may reduce warming in one part of the projection and increase warming in another
part.
But overall, they make no difference to the long-term trend due to CO2.
Even if you want to pretend the IPCC graph was taking these variables into account, the
actual temperature trend is still within the IPCC estimates.
Researchers say that's because the warming effect of carbon dioxide is so strong that
it's overcome all these short-term cooling factors over the last few years and continued
to send temperatures to new record highs.
The only way Moncton can claim it hasn't is to cherry-pick his temperature data set.
He wouldn't do that, would he?
In fact, between approximately 1997 and 2014, 2015, there was a period of 18 years and nine
months according to one of the data sets with no global warming at all.
As according to one of the data sets is the key point.
And which one is that?
I'm sure Molyneux is going to ask him, but let's take a look at the data set Moncton's
cherry-picked in the past.
There is the actual record from the scientists.
There is the trend line calculated on it.
It is horizontal.
No warming has happened for 17 years, nine months.
It's the temperature data set from Remote Sensing Systems, RSS.
The RSS data set has been the odd one out for over a decade now because all the other
data sets show clear atmospheric warming over that 18-year period.
Every scientific institute that monitors global temperature agrees that there's been roughly
the same amount of atmospheric warming over that period.
All except RSS.
And that's the data set Moncton chose to cite.
Now clearly there's something wrong when everyone's measuring average global temperature
and only one measurement is way out of line.
And Roy Spencer agreed there had to be something wrong with the RSS data.
And there was.
RSS discovered that its data were erroneous because of a miscalculation of diurnal cycle
drift and admitted this error in a paper published in March 2016.
But for some reason, Moncton didn't mention this.
So why doesn't Molyneux ask Moncton which data set he's quoting?
And if it's RSS, why didn't he mention the correction?
Moncton asked Moncton why he ignored all the other data sets which all show warming.
Don't worry, as soon as Moncton pauses for breath, I'm sure Molyneux will jump in and
question his claims.
But not yet, because Moncton's already moved on to where he published all this evidence.
I published a paper in the journal of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the Science Bulletin,
in January of last year in which I pointed out that there were various dubieties, various
uncertainties, various errors in the models that had not...
Well, let's not get carried away.
The journal Moncton's talking about, the Science Bulletin, previously called the Chinese Science
Bulletin, does have a reasonably respected print version.
It's one of many journals that describe themselves as supervised, sponsored or co-sponsored by
the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
But Moncton's paper wasn't published in the print version, it was in the separate online
open access version, and if you want to get a paper published there, you have to stump
up $2,500.
Pay-to-play online journals like this are not highly respected and are often poorly
peer reviewed.
It's a bit like a Vogon paying to have his poetry published in a vanity book of poems
and then claiming it's been published by the Royal Society of Literature.
One climatologist at the University of Reading found what he called glaring fundamental errors
in Moncton's paper.
It shouldn't surprise fans of my Moncton Buncombe video series, which showed that Moncton has
a history of getting his sums wrong.
Here's my own calculation.
And we get 1.6 degrees Celsius as the change in temperature for a doubling of CO2.
The warming we would expect to get if we doubled the CO2 concentration in the atmosphere, that
is what's known as climate sensitivity, will be about a fifth of a Celsius degree.
Just a little bit more than a fifth of a Celsius degree.
In his piece in the Forum on Physics and Society newsletter, Moncton gives yet another figure
for temperature rise, 0.58 degrees centigrade.
Apart from the howling error of calling Kelvin degrees Kelvin, which would have earned a
rebuke from any high school physics teacher, Moncton made a bigger mix-up in that last
calculation when he claimed to have divided sensitivity by three, but in fact he erroneously
divided forcing by three.
Facing up forcing and sensitivity is the climatological equivalent of confusing time and distance.
And now Moncton's come up with yet another calculation for the Earth's equilibrium temperature.
I can now prove that the variance either side of the central estimate of global warming
as a result of feedback is now only going to be kind of less than half a Celsius degree.
Well, let's not hold our breath.
Despite having come up with a variety of different calculations over the years, whose
results vary by a factor of eight, not one of Moncton's projections has even come close
to matching actual temperature trends.
He even predicted that global temperatures would follow solar activity downwards when
in fact they followed carbon dioxide levels upwards.
So just ten minutes in and surely there's more than enough for Molyneux to challenge
or at least ask for some clarification.
And he will question Moncton's claims, because fortunately for us, Molyneux is a sceptic.
It is strange to me that a scepticism about highly conjectural source data should be considered
anti-scientific when it seems to me that the scientific method is entirely predicated on
the rigorous application of scepticism, particularly to projected or modelled data.
Exactly right.
And here we have projected and modelled data based on a cherry-picked and erroneous data
set from a man with no scientific training and a history of making calculation blunders.
So go for it, Stefan.
Apply that scepticism.
Well, this is, I think, a lot of things that are not understood by people who are pro-global
warming or who have trouble with the sceptics.
Oh dear, I'm a little disappointed in you, Stefan.
Whatever happened to…
…the rigorous application of scepticism, particularly to projected or modelled data.
Well, maybe Molyneux is just giving Moncton free rein, because he also has real climatologists
on his show who present the evidence supporting the science.
Let's see.
He will be speaking at the Global Warming and Inconvenient Lie Conference in Phoenix,
Arizona.
And he is the author of The Moral Case for Fossil Fuels.
He's an expert on energy and industrial policy.
I mean, there's nothing more boring than somebody who's only ever looked at evidence
which supports his or her own conclusions.
What is the problem?
What is the concern?
You pimp your website for a second to make sure that people can go and get to the source
data.
It's climate-sceptic.com.
Is that right?
There is no guarantee that it's going to get warmer just because there's more CO2.
Eh, no.
It turns out that every one of his guests simply echoes the belief that it's all a
conspiracy.
So what does Molyneux believe when it comes to actual science?
There's no question that CO2 is produced by human beings.
There's no question that it has increased over the past, say, 50 or 70 years.
And there's no doubt that it has a warming factor in the atmosphere.
As far as that goes, I mean, anybody who would deny that is having trouble tying their shoelaces
and getting out of the door in the morning.
He just doesn't accept the conclusion of researchers in fields as far apart as volcanology,
glaciology, paleoclimatology, atmospheric physics, who've all done studies independent
of each other, some using models, some looking at temperature responses to past changes in
CO2, whose results all cluster around the three degrees centigrade range for a doubling
of CO2.
He's absolutely sure it'll be a lot less.
OK, why?
There's no doubt that putting additional CO2 into a particular closed system is going to
increase the temperature.
What people don't generally understand is this idea of the multiplier, that they can't
get to the catastrophic numbers that perhaps they want to get in order to get the scare
money from the government.
So they have this magic multiplier.
OK, I think I understand the problem.
Whenever someone takes a scientific fact and calls it magic, what he usually means is he
doesn't understand how it works.
And the part of the theory Molyneux doesn't get is what's called positive feedback.
I've explained this before in my videos.
A doubling of CO2 on its own would cause warming of just over one degree centigrade.
And Molyneux seems to accept this, and so does his most recent guest.
So one degree is not enough to worry anyone, you know, it's probably good for the earth,
you know, I would like to have a little longer growing season, all my backyard garden has
been killed by frost and I would have gotten a better crop this year, we'd have had a few
more growing days.
Well, never mind all that.
So we accept the calculation of climatologists that there'll be about one degree of warming
due to a doubling of CO2.
And when you increase the temperature of the earth by one degree centigrade, climatologists
say a few things start to happen that increase the temperature even more, what Stefan calls
the magic multiplier.
So let's see if it really is magic or basic physics that pretty much anyone can grasp.
All you have to do is look at each of these multipliers and say whether you think it's
physics or magic.
Let's start with this one.
As global temperatures increase, more water evaporates.
Physics or magic?
That one's physics.
And warmer air can hold more of this water vapour.
That's also physics.
And water vapour is a powerful greenhouse gas.
Physics.
So from a one degree rise in temperature due to a doubling of CO2, the water vapour content
of the atmosphere will increase, causing further warming.
Those who said magic, I'm sorry, it's all very basic physics.
Next positive feedback factor, albedo.
White surfaces reflect solar radiation while dark surfaces absorb it.
So ice, which is white, reflects most of the solar energy that falls on it, while the
darker ocean absorbs it.
Did you say magic?
No, sorry, that's physics.
So as ice melts and reveals the darker ocean underneath, the Earth reflects less solar
radiation back into space and absorbs more, causing more warming.
No, not magic, again, that's physics.
Next, the more concerned we get about global warming, the more likely it is that the gods
on Olympus will step in and make everything right again.
Physics or magic?
OK, that one is magic.
I could add feedback factors like melting permafrost that causes the release of large
quantities of methane, an even more powerful greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide.
But I won't labour the point.
These are all basic principles of physics.
They're not magic and they're not mysteries, unless of course you don't know about them.
As for the idea that these physical principles were somehow invented in order to get scare
money from the government, OK, perhaps I've exaggerated what Molyneux said slightly.
They can't get to the catastrophic numbers that perhaps they want to get in order to
get the scare money from the government.
No, he really did say that.
Once again, it's a conspiracy theory that doesn't match reality.
The conclusion that an increase in forcing would lead to positive feedback has been around
for decades.
The National Academy of Sciences described the factors involved in positive feedback
as far back as 1979.
Charles Keeling of the Scripps Institute wrote about them in 1969.
So it was the discovery of positive feedback that led to the calculation of increased temperature,
not the other way round.
If Molyneux ever gets to see this video, I'd like him to clarify if he still thinks positive
feedback is magic, or if he accepts that it's physics.
And does he think the conspiracy to hoax us really did begin in the 1960s?
Molyneux's rejection of positive feedback, the magic multiplier as he calls it, is not
just because he doesn't understand how it works, it's also based on his misunderstanding
of the Earth's geological history.
It's kind of a common sense thing, and given that CO2 was far higher in the past than it
is now, if runaway CO2 was going to happen, it would have happened a lot long before we
had the chance to evolve the capacity to come up with a global warming theory.
Yes, it did happen in the past, and you're simply unaware of the fact.
If Molyneux had chosen to interview a paleoclimatologist, then maybe he would have been told about the
periods in geological history where we had very strong warming because of rising CO2
levels.
There was the Cambrian hyper-warming event when carbon dioxide levels rose so much, reaching
levels 20 times higher than today, that they triggered feedback processes that turned a
frozen planet into a hot house.
Even though the Sun was 4% weaker than today, these processes even melted the ice at the
poles.
To take another example, at the end of the Permian, carbon dioxide released by flood
basalt warmed the Earth so much that methane hydrates on the ocean floor were released,
sending temperatures even higher, because methane is another powerful greenhouse gas
that breaks down to form carbon dioxide.
It's another example of positive feedback, and again the Earth became a hot house and
the ice caps melted.
Closer to home, we've seen very strong warming at the end of each glaciation.
The warming was triggered by a small increase in solar forcing, but it was the positive
feedback that resulted from this that melted ice sheets the size of continents several
miles deep.
Whether you want to call this runaway warming, or warming that causes the ice at both poles
to disappear, or even use the term that scientists use, which is hyper-warming, is entirely up
to you.
Whatever you want to call it, the fact remains that the average temperature of the Earth
over the last 500 million years has ranged from about 10°C to 22°C, warming and cooling
between these extremes not once, but several times.
Now please don't pose comments like, nya nya, and this happened long before cars and
humans came along, because firstly scientists have concluded that the cause of these warming
and cooling events was changes in CO2 concentration.
Yes, despite what the bloggers may have led you to believe, researchers have shown a very
clear correlation between temperature and CO2 over the last 500 million years.
The reason for the discrepancy is that bloggers conveniently leave out growing solar power.
And secondly, you might accept that there were extreme ranges of temperature in the
past, well done, but we're dealing in this video with Molyneux's belief, which is that
global temperature has always been stable.
And if you want to argue that the warming never reached the point where we became as
hot as Venus, of course it didn't, for the same reason that when you leave your car in
the hot sun with the windows up, it heats up, but never reaches the point where the
inside melts.
I've explained this physical principle before in my videos.
There must be mechanisms by which any sort of big spike or change in the system is self-correcting.
Why must there be?
It's lovely to have dreams and hopes, but we're not living in the world of Hollywood
or even magic.
We're in the real world where these things actually did happen.
If average global temperature rose 12 degrees centigrade in the past because of rises in
carbon dioxide levels, what's this imaginary impediment to global temperatures rising around
three degrees because of rising carbon dioxide levels today?
The problem is Molyneux doesn't even accept that these huge climate swings happened at
all.
Instead, he just listens to people who have no knowledge on the subject, who simply echo
his beliefs.
I agree with you.
There must be some kind of negative feedback that tends to keep the Earth's temperature
about the same.
No, it hasn't stayed about the same.
Oh, never mind.
Look, trying to hope that there's some sort of mechanism that must have created a condition
that didn't exist is like making a wish within a dream.
Stefan, why not learn about real climate science from people other than those who echo your
belief that it's all a conspiracy?
I'm sure it won't change your conviction that it is all a conspiracy, but at least you can
now concentrate on trying to show that these conclusions are wrong instead of believing
they don't exist.
I hope you don't mind me being so blunt, but you did, after all, claim that this was your
goal.
I mean, there's nothing more boring than somebody who's only ever looked at evidence which supports
his or her own conclusions.
Look at the country evidence, and that will breed, I think, a very important and virtuous
humility.
