My name is Bilbo Baggins.
Why not?
Much as I was disappointed in The Hobbit, it is hard to ignore that the industry climate
this Hydra was created in is very different from the industry that produced the Lord of
the Rings trilogy, which went into production thirteen years ago.
So the original trilogy kind of crossed the nostalgia border a little while ago.
So I kind of have to admit, my disappointment in The Hobbit stems largely from trends that
sprung up from the original trilogy.
The original franchise changed the way movies were packaged, filmed, marketed.
And if Transformers was the game change for modern film aesthetic and marketing, Lord
of the Rings was the game change for film franchise and marketing.
So for the next three episodes, we are going to look at the product, the content, the effect
on the industry and culture that was the original Lord of the Rings film trilogy, starting with
The Fellowship of the Ring, the best film, the most cohesive, well edited, and well written,
best adapted film of the three.
Shall we?
Much that once was is lost, for none now live who remember it.
Except for you, and that guy, and this guy, this other guy.
Okay, there are plenty of people who now live that remember it, but it was a cool line.
So let's talk a little bit about genre.
I've always found it a bit odd that fantasy and science fiction are lumped together in
the bookstore, frustrating even, as I would not consider myself much of a fantasy fan.
The two genres have a touch of an ideological split, and while obviously every individual
work has a different theme and purpose and level of originality, yada yada yada, the
basic gist is that fantasy is more history oriented and backwards looking, where science
fiction is more speculation and science oriented and forwards looking.
Obviously these things exist on a bit of a spectrum.
You look at something like Dune, which is sort of a weird futuristic slash historical
fiction that's very influenced by history and mythology, and the Dragon Riders of Pern
series, which is at least as sci-fi-ish as Star Wars was.
But fantasy as a genre has always been kind of limited by its influence, and that influence
in modern times has been one thing.
Bam!
The modern fantasy genre was heavily inspired by the works of Mr. Tolkien, and Mr. Tolkien
was heavily inspired by European languages and history.
Also, the western world, we just like Europe.
So as a result, fantasy is very rooted in European folklore and history.
Movies like Princess Mononoke, for instance, which incorporate lots of Japanese mythology,
yes, but they don't define the genre to western folks the same way something familiar
feeling like dragon heart or willow mite.
Fantasy is the realm of magical expansions of things that are already familiar in the
collective unconscious.
Castles, kings, dragons, fairies, magic, old beard guys, and pointy hats.
Fantasy is folkloric, and yeah, you can just pull stuff out of your ass and call it fantasy,
and I guess that would be true, but it's certainly not what comes to mind when people think of
genre.
Marketing is a very important component, especially when it comes to film.
As a result, there's not a lot of wiggle room for new ideas.
In film, fantasy has been the realm of the rehash of archetypes.
Sci-fi, on the other hand, while sci-fi has had plenty of dumb and pulpy shit, it's
also had plenty of opportunity to produce culture-changing, challenging cinematic masterworks
like Alien, 2001, A Space Odyssey, Blade Runner, D- wait, oh, also, sci-fi has Star Wars.
But wait, wait, you say, Star Wars is science-fantasy, it's got the force, it's not really science
fiction, and yeah, I might agree, but think again of Joanne and Cletus.
So what did fantasy have?
What were the great fantasy films?
Dragonheart?
Labyrinth?
Dragon Slayer?
Yeah, there was a bit of a fantasy craze in the 80s, fueled in part by the renaissance
of the works of Tolkien and subsequent underground rise of Dungeons and Dragons, but it stayed
pretty much underground.
Fantasy up to this point had been relegated to something of a low-art ghetto.
At best, fantasy films were cult classics.
You had a couple of failed attempts at big blockbusters, no serious successes.
At the end of the day, these suckers just didn't make much money, critics despised
them, and not a lot of people saw them.
Fantasy was a niche market, and even if Lord of the Rings was one of the best-selling books
of all time, that didn't necessarily mean that the public, Joanne and Cletus, wanted
to see a movie based on it.
Enter this guy.
And thus begins one of the most baffling film careers in Hollywood history.
Peter Jackson took a sort of Sam Raimi trajectory, as he started in the realm of extremely low-budget
horror films, but this man would go on to produce the most Oscar-winning film of all
time.
You can definitely see this, shall we say, preoccupation in some of the fight scenes
in Lord of the Rings.
The Peter Jackson oeuvre all throughout the 80s and early 90s was gross-out and goofy.
Then one day, Peach is all like, oh, 180, I'm gonna do a series art film.
Gina!
I'm coming!
I'm coming!
Heavenly Creatures was not only a critical darling, it also netted Peach an Oscar nomination
for Best Screenplay, started his career in earnest in Hollywood, and also this... lady.
I forget her name.
It also got him the attention of Miramax, who were the American distributors of the
film and at the time were helmed by Harvey Weinstein, who, for Peach, negotiated with
the producer who had held the film rights to Lord of the Rings since the 70s.
So Peach and his partner Fran presented to Miramax a two-film version of Lord of the
Rings, which was budgeted at $75 million.
But after a bunch more revisions, some, you know, number crunching, they realized that
the movies were really probably realistically gonna easily cost twice that for both of them.
So Miramax was like, make one movie.
Eesh.
So for contract reasons, Peach had about four weeks to shop this sucker around Hollywood
to find a studio that would actually let them make the two-movie pitch that they made.
Eventually, they landed at New Line, where Peach had a friend there named Mark Ardesky,
and Ardesky was very interested in the presentation, and he took the pitch on one condition, that
the two films be made into three.
The Lord of the Rings is a big-ass, sprawling, heavily detailed, many-charactered, often
meandering high-fantasy epic.
It is the story of a little hobbit named Frodo Baggins and his hundreds of billions of friends
who all fight in a war over a ring of power which is powerful and dangerous in some manner.
Frodo also falls down a lot.
Also, despite the fact that it is a high-fantasy epic, it's also the story of the everyman.
It works more naturally here due to the setup.
So often, it's hard to get the everyman into the protagonist slot because what business
does everyman having the doings of war and shit?
Ah, the great lengths some books and movies go to to get the coveted everyman into that
protagonist slot.
So often, you find that they are the products of some predetermined, destined, messianic
prophecy or whatever.
Someone barges in and tells them they've been Jesus the whole time.
Or sometimes it's just idiotic.
But the setup of the ring works very naturally for Frodo.
I get the ring.
I could become this, or this, you, worst case scenario, this, because you do not matter
and you have no power.
So because of the powerful, corrupting nature of this ring, only a non-powerful, unimportant
person can carry it.
But of course, as in any adaptation, they added a bunch of crap and they cut a bunch
of crap out.
So let's get this Tom Bombadil thing out of the way.
Hey, doll, merry doll.
So the hobbits are running for their lives, escaping the Shire, fleeing, and they meet
this weirdo in the woods and the plot just stops.
And they hang out and he's like a big-lipped alligator guy.
Hey, come, merry doll, derry doll, my darling.
And that it happens and then the hobbits leave and it's never brought up again.
Okay, yes, I know Gandalf brings him up at the council, but only to mention how he's
completely useless to their endeavor.
I feel like Bombadil made more sense in an earlier draft, where the adventures were more
episodic, like in The Hobbit, and then Tolkien was just so enamored with the character he
kept him in anyway.
See, Tom Bombadil sucks.
He's just a tension-destroying element.
I mean, he feels out of place even in the book.
I mean, for the most part, whenever a character comes into the book, they like pay off later
or pop back up at some point, but not this guy.
Nope.
Besides that, and the scouring of the Shire, which happens at the end of the third book,
they didn't cut out a whole lot.
Although there is one biggie that I remember people getting their panties in a real twist
about, and that is Arwen, warrior princess.
If you want him, come and claim him.
Which, well, originally Arwen and Eowyn were gonna be kind of mushed together into one
character when it was just one movie, and then when it got expanded into three, they
kind of kept the Arwen, warrior princess angle anyway, sort of.
You see it most pronounced when we first see Arwen, and she replaces Glorfindel, which,
yeah, why not?
You know, only action thing she does in all three movies, but then she pretty quickly
recedes into her original role in the book of passive elf lady, where all I do is sit
and look pretty and wait for my man and carry with me the wisdom of the ages.
You can see some scissor marks when it comes to Arwen's development.
They did film a bunch of the Arwen, warrior princess stuff, and after her big action scene,
she immediately retreats back into delicate ladyship and stays there for the rest of the
three movies with the elves, who are a touch racist.
It is in men that we misplace our hope.
Men.
Men are weak.
I hate those guys.
I do this one chump after my daughter.
I can't get rid of this guy.
Looks like it's time for a forced-pige conflict.
Not enough there in the source material.
Jam that conflict right in.
May or may not feel incredibly forced and contrived, but hey, it's a conflict.
Aragorn.
In the book, he's not very interesting.
I mean, in the book he's ready to step it up and be the hero king when the time comes.
He carries around the broken sword with him because symbolism.
He doesn't have very much in the way of internal conflict.
I mean, he does sometimes second-guess himself during the quest, but he doesn't have that
huge internal dilemma about whether he's even worthy to begin with.
So let's add one.
The same blood flows in my veins.
The same weakness.
Yeah, I guess if you've got Elrond raising you your whole life, bearing down on you about
how weak he thinks you are, then yeah, maybe you develop a bit of a complex.
She stays because she still has hope.
She stays for you.
She belongs with her people.
Do you understand?
You are not as good as me.
And also they added a bunch of crap with Aragorn and Arwen, but we'll get into that one next
time.
So not only does Elrond not believe in Aragorn and men in general, Aragorn doesn't believe
in himself.
You will face the same evil, and you will defeat it.
His men are prone to weakness and greed, and so Aragorn's subplot is basically a three-movie
long journey where he finds his confidence and overcomes his great-great-great-great-times-like-twenty-great-grandfather's-man-weakness conflict.
On the production end of things, Viggo Mortensen wasn't cast as Aragorn until a couple of days
after shooting started.
Aragorn was originally going to be played by...
Stuart Townsend?
As in...
Eugh.
Dodge that bullet.
But for the most part, all three films are pretty impeccably cast.
So I continue to kind of be bewildered by the casting of Hugo Weaving as ageless elf-lord
Elrond.
Oh, he's a fine actor, but compared to the other delicately featured elves, the figwits
the Legolai, the Arwins, rough, hard-edged, cranky-pants, craggy Hugo Weaving, he's a
touch out of place.
And you know who was rumored to want to play Elrond?
And they didn't cast him?
And you didn't cast him?
On the other end of the spectrum, you've got Cate Blanchett as Galadriel, and here they
didn't so much add a conflict as put the one that was already there on steroids.
In place of a Dark Lord, you would have a queen!
They also made her a little creepy, where in the book everyone adores her, here we get
some setup.
One was the guy.
I'm sorry, I didn't mean to freak you out.
Go to the foundations of the earth!
Frodo's reaction here is priceless.
Okay, jeez, I, uh, never mind.
Honestly, most of the goofy shit that feels kind of out of place in Fellowship was from
the book, and then roided up for the movie.
I'm not hurt.
You should be dead.
Wait, yeah!
Magic chain mail or no, buddy, how did you survive that?
And how do you get anywhere falling down as much as you do?
Don't you just make Boromir fall down, too?
Speaking of Boromir, I don't get the impression that Tolkien much
liked Boromir as a character.
In the book, like Aragorn, he's not terribly interesting, but he's also kind of a one-note
douchenozzle.
Yeah, he gets redeemed before he dies, sure, but his purpose was more or less a cautionary
app, see what happens when you get all power hungry?
You get orked.
Short hand of film language notwithstanding, movie Boromir is more dynamic, and with very
little change from the book, really.
They added a bit about how he's worried about his father's rule and how he doesn't want
Aragorn to be king.
Gondor has no king.
Gondor needs no king.
And then we find out that he's really just worried for his people, and he gets some bonding
moments with the hobbits that aren't contrived or ham-fisted, and then in the end he comes
around to Aragorn and this death scene, man.
All the people.
All the people.
Honestly, this, to me, is why Fellowship feels like the best movie.
The ending has the best build-up, the most sincere payoff, and it doesn't drag.
Okay.
Okay, this drags a little.
Okay, it drags a lot.
But the bit with Boromir doesn't.
My king.
But my big takeaway from Fellowship is that it's a study in successful adaptation.
I know they moved a lot of lines and scenes around, they cut shit out here, added it there,
but ultimately it was to the benefit for the piece as a whole.
The filmmakers even found ways to sneak chapter titles into dialogue.
Shortcut to what?
The mushrooms!
Shadow and flame.
Riddles in the dark.
This film, more than the other two, does stay surprisingly close to the source material.
Hell, a lot of the stuff that feels like goofy shit they added just for the sake of action were actually in the book.
And, more importantly, drove the plot forward.
Ahem.
So back to the idea that fantasy has historically been kind of backwards-looking, history-oriented,
often even a little self-indulgent, it doesn't mean to say that it couldn't be done well.
It just hadn't been by that point.
Or, at the very least, it had not been commercially successful.
And it's kind of easy to see why.
It is hard to be genuinely, emotionally sincere about something that's just so out there.
Like the Balrog scene, for instance.
Even the dialogue is pretty much directly from the book.
And this could be so easily so goofy with dialogue like this.
I am a servant of the secret fire, wielder of the flame of Arnor.
The dark fire will never bail you, flame of Uldun!
But this is Sir Ian we're talking about.
Sir Ian's like, go hard or go home.
If we were to draw a graph of my process, of my method, something like this,
Sir Ian, Sir Ian, Sir Ian, action.
Wizard, you shall not pass! Cut!
Sir Ian, Sir Ian, Sir Ian.
So the fact that these films exist at all were a colliding of stars that weren't terribly likely.
That they'd be made with these people who, for the most part,
had good instincts adapting this material for a modern audience.
That the studio allowed them the freedom to make the film that they more or less wanted,
and that they were allowed to make three movies at all.
When you look at the way things are today, it's kind of ironic to think that they had to fight to get three.
But also the fact that these movies came out in the climate that they did.
Bellow Ship of the Ring came out not four months after 9-11.
We had just invaded Afghanistan, Iraq was right around the corner,
the world was changing, and suddenly the high, epic, simplistic world
of Tolkien's emotional sincerity didn't seem so unpalatable anymore.
We wanted that escapism, to go to the world of good versus evil,
where friends are truly good friends who truly love each other,
and the bad guys are genetically engineered for evil and ugly,
so we don't feel bad when they die, and you don't have to be ashamed of your hairy feet.
It is escapism, but it's high escapism.
And while it is difficult, incredibly difficult to do that well, or credibly,
as we found out, there was a place for that.
With Frodo on the ground.
