Good morning, Internet. I came out here to write and do research and to think about the channel and its evolution.
The Staten Island video, for example, started life as part of the background reading for the Statue of Liberty video.
Originally planned to be just a small footnote a couple weeks later, I got a little obsessed with the story of Christopher Billup,
and that small footnote took one year and two transatlantic flights to finish.
That's a lot.
To cover costs, I should have put an ad at the end of it, but I just don't think that would have worked creatively for the project.
Think about it.
Instead of leaving past gray, in a cemetery, alone, soaking wet, and, frankly, half-crazed,
to end on, this video was brought to you by, I couldn't do it.
And it was much the same with the road trip video.
That was a real transformative life event for me,
and the project became such a difficult technical nightmare over three summers to finish,
that by the time it was done, it was just too personal.
So coming here and thinking about the videos I've been working on, and looking at my plans for future videos,
I see a lot of projects like those.
Projects that don't make financial sense without a sponsor, and that don't make creative sense with one.
So, I'm here to ask if I can double down on you.
You, the viewer who watches and really likes the kind of thing I make.
If that's you, consider supporting the channel directly on Patreon.
Unless you're in school, of course, students are forbidden from donating.
Your job is to work on you and make yourself an independent person in the world,
which is a hard enough task that should require all of your attention and resources.
Focus on that. I'll catch you later.
For everyone else, there's no pressure or obligation here.
I only want patrons to support my work who are happy and able to do so.
If you can't, we're good. Just watching is support.
Anyway, I think you can see now why sometimes things take a while.
We all like to joke about how long it is between grey uploads.
I see you in the comments. I like to make those jokes.
I wouldn't want to live on an internet without recurring memes.
But it's important for me for you to know that this channel is the creative core of my life.
It's my full-time work, sometimes to the point of real madness.
Anyway, thank you for watching. Consider giving on Patreon.
And now, I've got some scripts I'm gonna go work on.
I'll see you later, internet. Have a great day.
