If you watch any big movie trailer released in the last 150 years, as long as it's not a romantic comedy,
you can almost guarantee at some point the trailer devolves into a cacophony of motion, noise, explosions, and fights.
Action inherently tells a story. It's confusing, scary, visceral. Something is happening.
It demands your attention to try to find out what's going on and why.
These trailers continue to get made because they work.
If even one of these quick visuals catches your eye,
if one of those six frames of a lightsaber with a cross guard made of more lightsaber really catch your fancy,
that, my friends, is a ticket sale.
Hello, Pirate Bay? Two tickets to StarWars7.mp4, please.
But when you sit down and watch the film for real, what makes an action scene good?
I've watched at least ten films in my time, and I think I've isolated what makes a good action film down to two specific points.
In my experience, good action scenes
COMMUNICATE the action well.
In other words, the physical space of the scene and what's happening in it,
but also advance the story by developing the theme or providing characterization.
Let's start by looking at a film you've never heard of that does neither.
Death Wish 3 is a film about a man who protects the downtrodden by shooting a lot of bad people.
The action itself has a degree of viscera to it, blood, explosions, and so on, but it doesn't get across any particular ideas.
It's a man shooting people with his gun, and you know they deserve it because they dress evil and cackle,
and they're shooting at the good guy.
The violence is huge.
Kersey kills over 70 people on screen in this film, and he does it with an array of massive weapons.
In a good film, action is the result of story, and you're engaged in the action because you care about the characters.
Bad films have bad stories, or no stories at all, and uninteresting characters,
and try to regain your attention with the action.
This isn't a hard-and-fast rule, but when a film has to pull out an actual machine gun and a missile launcher to keep your attention,
that's an admission the film doesn't have any other way of doing it.
Numerous scenes are dedicated to telling you how cool the guns are just to make sure you know.
Oh, a .44 Magnum is a pistol cartridge,
and a .475 Wildey Magnum is a shorter version of the African big game cartridge.
Oh, is this not big enough for you?
How about this machine gun?
Here, look at it. Just look at it for a while.
No, really, there's literally a scene where a guy shows you the machine gun he has, and then they put it back.
Normally, you'd be getting invested in the characters and story, but instead the film has to stop and go,
No, keep watching. The action's coming, and it's gonna be big, we promise.
And then you actually get to the action, and, well, it's just the most uninterestingly shot action you can get.
Shot of Paul shooting he gun.
Shot of bad guys falling down.
Rinse. Repeat.
Dry your hands with the towel dispenser.
Oh, it's out. I'm gonna have to go into the stall and tear off a bunch of toilet paper.
There's one really good piece of action in the film, and it's here.
For 12 frames, this guy really knows how dead he is.
So not only does it not advance the story, but the action is uninteresting, too,
which is the cardinal sin of a crappy budget action film.
There's times when Death Wish Man talks to people, eats with them, and has a nice date with a lady half his age,
and we learn a little more about him and the people he's trying to protect.
But a good film would fuse action and characterization.
You'd learn about Death Wish Man while he was death-wishing
instead of having to stop everything and go have dinner with the nice people downstairs.
Death Wish 3 doesn't tick either of these boxes, but who cares about Death Wish 3?
Instead, let's look at The Avengers, one of the highest-grossing films of all time.
Avengers has some of the worst action scenes I've seen in my entire life.
This is my favorite scene to deconstruct.
It feels off, jarring somehow, doesn't it?
Well, here's why.
Obviously, their heads are nowhere near each other,
so they cut to this other angle for the headbutt,
since you can't see how far apart their heads are from here,
but because they've just cut from this angle,
it's really obvious to the viewer that she hasn't actually hit him
because we know how far apart they are.
It automatically reads as fake,
but then before it cuts back to the previous angle,
this henchman walks right in front of the frame,
so when they cut back to this angle, it's super jarring.
In these two shots, Black Widow flippy-doos off a guy to crush this guy
before he can go for his gun, which he presumably dropped.
I say presumably because whoever shot this scene
never shows if he has a gun or if he dropped it or where it went.
He's clearly reaching for something.
They seemingly accidentally obscured what he's reaching for
and forgot to get a pickup shot or put it in the edit,
but since I'm such a nice guy, I decided to help out.
Here's a shot of a hand reaching for a gun that was dropped,
and here's a shot of Scarlett Johansson reacting to that.
Feel free to edit this into the director's cut of the film, Joss,
unless you're too busy smoking Whedon.
Oh, cut this part out.
In other words, the scene fails to communicate what's happening in it.
The editing and cinematography are ridiculously jarring.
Why is this shot sideways?
Why is it back to normal? What?
It's sideways again.
Please help me.
Avengers is hurting my brain.
Mistakes like this are all over the series.
It would be too easy to blame Joss Whedon or Jimmy Huzitz
or whoever directed the nightmare that is the Hulk reboot.
Heck, the cinematographer for this scene,
the worst scene in film history, let me remind you,
is Seamus McGarvey, who also did the 2014 Godzilla film,
a.k.a. the best looking thing ever made before Fury Road came out.
So the guy's not an idiot.
The sheer consistency of these mistakes
leads me to believe that the deeper problem
is with a large company trying to put out
a huge, cohesive, expanded universe
comprising over a dozen movies and counting.
Inevitably, the production is either rushed
or reined in by the corporate types
trying to keep the whole thing together
and on track for 2018 when phase 7 billion starts.
Stoke for Avengers?
I hear Marvel got really hands on this time.
They really pinned in Joss Whedon creatively,
so how could that go wrong?
Ironically, this was the problem with Death Wish 3 as well.
The film was produced by the Canon Group,
famous for rushing all aspects of production
and being run by two of the most cinema-illiterate people of all time.
So what kind of stories can a director unhemmed
by the need to fit a giant pre-existing production pipeline do?
Here's the part where I talk specifically about
Quentin Tarantino for far too long, sorry.
But that's because Tarantino is really good
at telling a story using action.
I mean, look at this famous shot
where you don't even see what's happening.
The camera slides away,
screams, music,
and eventually, Mr. Blonde enters the frame
carrying a fake plastic human ear.
He hasn't just put this guy through something awful.
He's put you through it too
by making you imagine it happening
instead of simply showing it to you.
This makes the audience reflexively hate Mr. Blonde.
It makes you wish that someone could save the cop.
And the fact that now you care
and now you're invested,
that's one of my favorite things that can happen in cinema.
Don't! Don't! Don't!
This is made surprising because the camera work
does everything it can to avoid reminding you
that Mr. Orange is in the room with them.
Even when it pans away,
Mr. Orange would be lying on the ground right down there,
but they angle it just right so you don't see him.
You forget he's there.
This makes the re-emergence of Mr. Orange into the scene
surprising and engaging,
and it does it by mostly not showing you anything.
Reservoir Dog certainly leaves room for improvement
in the visual storytelling department.
Take this scene again from his first film
and much less iconic for a good reason.
How does he get across how destructive and surprising
a guy shooting a gun 700 times in public would look?
Well, there's a couple of screams dubbed in post
and we get a shot of a cop getting hurt.
We don't really learn much about Mr. Pink in this scene
except that he has a magic gun with infinite ammo
and is a really bad shot.
Pink actually took part in the final shootout at the end,
but his bullets missed everyone.
In Dejango Unchained-a,
another Tarantino character kills another lawman.
What has Tarantino learned after 20 years
of pointing cameras at guns?
Dentist Waltz is about to shoot the sheriff with a Derringer.
A Derringer is a tiny gun.
They look really silly.
They're derisively known as purse guns.
It can still kill you, but it looks really silly
if you execute it poorly.
How do you make shooting someone out of nowhere
with a tiny toy-like gun dramatic and big?
Ah!
You see that?
It's a tiny gun, but he pulls in
until the thing dominates the frame.
It doesn't look so tiny anymore, does it?
This simple reframing technique
makes all the difference on an audience.
Here's a scene from From Dusk Till Dawn 3
in which a character pulls the same gun out of nowhere.
Kill her.
It's a less surprising way of doing it, isn't it?
Which is weird because this movie knows
how to make a gun look threatening.
I'm not gonna steal it or nothing.
I just want them to see it up close.
Is this close enough?
Woosh.
But back to Cutie Patootie,
this shot continues to show how surprising this all is
by having a bunch of people react to it in the frame.
But more importantly, we get Schultz's reaction.
He's just like,
whatever, this is my day job.
His lack of reaction is a reaction.
Schultz takes his time with it.
He's clinical,
like some kind of former medical professional.
In the space of less than a minute,
we see two shots from the same gun
and how everyone in the scene feels about those shots,
and we learn a lot about one of our main characters.
He's talked about too much already,
but I still think that modern Hollywood
could stand to learn a lot from the way this guy makes films.
It's standard now on most movies
to, at the very least, have two cameras.
Okay, you have your main shot,
and then there's this other camera,
and then you're just—you're sticking it somewhere.
You know, it's just—it's—it's a sloppy—
it's a sloppy angle,
but it's just there to give you a little bit more footage in the editing room,
and, you know, so you can just kind of get through your day a little bit easier.
I don't want that.
I have one camera on the set,
and the only shot we're shooting is the shot I'm framing.
I frame the shot,
and Bob Richardson lights the shot for that frame,
and that's it.
And I don't want sloppy-ass crap,
all right, you know, in there that I can just cut to.
Quentin Tarantino has a few weird specific obsessions,
like only using one camera,
shooting on film instead of digital, even in the modern day,
and...feet.
But these obsessions seem to protect him from the garbage
of the modern Hollywood production pipeline.
But you don't have to look to Tarantino for good examples of films
that use good action to tell a great story.
Just get across what's happening well,
and make sure it's happening for a reason
to characters you've made the audience care about.
["Charles"]
Alien takes its time getting to know the crew of the Nostromo
before it sends them into alien murder town,
and it keeps the silly rubber monster suit scary
by being careful with how they show it and when,
and using only brief bursts of violence.
["Wake up!"
["Dallas!"
But enough about not showing action.
What happens when you want to show people what's happening?
Terminator and Terminator 2 both use action flawlessly,
but of course they would.
Everyone knows Terminator 1 is the best film ever made,
but this chase sequence in Terminator 2 is especially good
because the shots contrast the size of the vehicles involved,
reflecting how the T-1000 is a far more advanced machine
than the T-800.
Robert Patrick is a fantastic actor,
but he's not exactly a muscle man.
Making him seem threatening to Arnold
requires visual compositions like this one
to show what's going on under the surface.
The slippy, shiny, CGI-y surface.
This scene used to look good, but it kinda doesn't anymore.
I'll explain why in a future video.
The Avengers movies have comedic writing in them,
but there's rarely comedy in their actual action scenes.
It goes missing somewhere.
I think lots of directors don't even know you can do comedy with visuals.
You can make a scene funny just by how you choreograph movement.
In Fargo, by framing the corpse out,
the Coen brothers create a fantastic shot
of a bleeding Steve Buscemi angrily kicking at nothing,
summing up just how much the character's kidnapping scheme
has gone off the rails in a single image.
The one thing the Coens can definitely teach
is that if you hold with something long enough,
it becomes funny.
Take this scene, where the action
is just a man having a temper tantrum.
Kill it!
A worse filmmaker would cut from here to the next scene,
but instead, they're willing to hold on it,
and they stay there long enough that he realizes how silly he looks
and goes back to scraping his car.
Or this scene, where they hold long enough on Buscemi's tissue-covered face
as he stares at the money
that it becomes inherently funny watching him take himself seriously.
Jesus Christ.
Or this scene in Miller's Crossing,
which stretches this principle past its breaking point
and pushes it into becoming one of the best scenes in film history.
No matter what level of violence you're going for,
it's always possible to get a laugh out of it
if you do it right.
-♪ I am...
I'm...
I'm a slave...
So there are a lot of good ways you can use the simple act
of a person hurting another person to get something across.
Just think about how to show what's happening.
Maybe don't show any of it.
Ah!
Maybe show too much.
Ah!
You don't need any giant gun props, either.
You just need to know what feelings and ideas you want to communicate with the scene
and execute it in a way that brings these things to the foreground.
You can say a lot by showing very little violence.
Sometimes, you don't even need squibs, or blood, or gore
to imply a character has been killed.
Sometimes, you just need to...
well.
-♪
-♪
-♪ Brudda, budda, cookin'
♪ Nuddy, budda, budda
♪ Dinah, sister
♪ Hidin' out on brunch, baby
Thank you all very much for watching.
I'd like to say a special thanks to
Niels Abildgaard,
Peter Brodeson,
Renslayer,
Rikami,
Samael,
SCARTHARAX,
LORD OF THE ROACHES,
Scott Gertin,
Sean Higgins,
Thad Wasilewski,
Two Armed Blues and Red Drapes,
and Axelblaze.
Wait a second.
Why is...
Why is Axelblaze at the bottom of the list?
I...I try to alphabetize the list,
and for some reason, Axelblaze's name is at the bottom.
That doesn't make any se...
Anyway, Axelblaze, if you're watching this,
and I know you are because you're giving me money to make these for some reason,
about five years ago,
you had an avatar on the Something Awful forums
that was, uh, from Adventure Time,
and that avatar sold me on watching the show,
and I really, really liked it,
and it caused me to make radically different life decisions,
and I might not be making these videos
if it weren't for the choices that I was led to make
as a result of watching a cartoon at your non-recommendation,
uh, based on the avatar you had.
So, thanks a lot.
It feels...really weird to be admitting that, you know?
Anyway, see you next time!
