Austin Jorgensen's series Lisa is one of those cult hits,
the kind where it's quite genuinely formed a cult of people who are really into it,
but not many people outside the in-group really know that much about it.
This is probably because it's hard to talk about.
It's got a lot of really funny moments,
some excellent examples of great writing or perfect comedic timing,
but unlike, for example, Undertale,
the story's content has some pretty gruesome and uncomfortable material.
It enters into an artistic territory where you'd need to know someone pretty well
to feel okay recommending it to them.
It explores themes that can be quite difficult to talk about
and which plenty of people quite justifiably don't want to,
and the game is too good at focusing on what it wants to be about
that you can't ignore it and just focus on something else.
There's a process in modern game discourse I like to call memification.
To be a little bit cynical, if you wanted to for easy clicks,
there are some games you can invent reasons to talk about if you need to.
The game's story and themes are loose and friendly and open enough
that you can reapply the critical lens over and over
and always have a new, somewhat facile element to explore for an audience.
You can speculate for all time about some games
if they have certain features that make it easy to do so.
You could even do a needlessly in-depth analysis
of one character's relationship with anime.
No way, that one was mine, wasn't it?
But when someone like that attempts to play Lisa,
a game whose themes are unavoidable and specific and beautiful and horrific and sad,
the best one could say is,
this reminds me of Undertale.
The only way to relate the experience through such a critically dysfunctional perspective
is by using the lens of one of the two or three games you can talk about endlessly
before going back to talking about them endlessly.
Also, um, Lisa came out quite a bit before Undertale.
Just saying, man.
This is not a criticism of Undertale or the pretend-to-think-about-games economy,
although I guess on some level it kind of is both of those.
Rather, I'm laboring to point out that Lisa doesn't get talked about too much
because by its nature, the reasons why it's good can be hard to talk about.
With that in mind, I'm going to talk about it here
and spoil aspects of the plots of all three of the games
while not specifically summarizing them in explicit detail.
I would highly recommend pausing the video here and playing the games for yourself.
They're all either cheap or free,
so there isn't much of an excuse not to,
and I don't want to preemptively ruin your experience.
See you in, I don't know, 20 hours?
♪♪
Most people probably at least vaguely know of Yume Nikki or Dream Diary,
a free game made in an early version of RPG Maker
in which you control a girl named Madotsuki who refuses to leave her room.
Instead, she can go to bed and enter her dreams.
The game is light on plot,
instead relying on exploration and curiosity about the dream worlds you visit and how they work.
You can collect items which have some uses,
but I wouldn't really say the game has puzzles, per se.
It functions more as a dream itself, floating from area to area
as interesting and sometimes random events happen at you.
The game's well-known largely because of some of these events,
like when hitting a light switch sometimes makes this face appear.
♪♪
This face probably made Yume Nikki popular,
and this has a 1 in 64 chance of even happening.
I, uh, actually had to steal this footage.
While the game doesn't really have a plot,
it has buckets of story if you feel like interpreting the ideas it throws at you.
Consistent imagery of car crash victims,
grasping hands, staring eyes, being chased,
the sudden outbursts of quite scary visuals and music.
The reasons Madotsuki doesn't want to go out into the world for real
are made astonishingly clear in her dreams.
The game is, really, an exploration of one character's psyche
and what they think about in their most unguarded moments.
People think they can escape into their dreams,
but you bring your mind with you,
and if the thing you're trying to escape from had such a big impact on you,
you're not getting away so easily.
While the game is often praised for being weird or random,
Yume Nikki has a good deal of clarity of purpose
and probably resonates with people
because the experiences and ideas it explores are almost universal.
Almost everyone knows something bad could happen to them if they went outside,
so playing to the paranoia that can come from that
reaches a lot of people in parts of themselves
they don't often realize are there.
Yume Nikki was pretty impactful for a free RPG Maker game.
There's several fan games and even more original but overtly inspired works,
and one of them is Lisa, now called Lisa the First.
Lisa is a story about a girl trapped in an abusive home trying to imagine her escape,
but even in her own imagination, her experiences follow her everywhere.
The similarities are already clear, but the differences are interesting.
Trying to find an escape does involve collecting and using various items to progress,
which is a little more direct than how Yume Nikki does it,
but the themes are also much more direct,
making them somewhat more impactful.
Almost every character is portrayed by Lisa's abusive father,
and trying to play to the bizarre whims of this rather singular cast
is in its own way kind of depressing and scary.
I'd recommend people play as much of the game as they can
until they find a puzzle they don't know how to solve
or get sick of dying to the spiders with the father's face on them
and then watch a playthrough of someone who knows what they're doing on YouTube.
It doesn't really hold up as a game,
but as a story, as an exploration of a mind, as an atmosphere,
it's emotionally quite an experience.
An idea that starts here and prevails throughout the series
and is one of its best features is the reuse of music from previous areas,
but at different speeds.
These stories put you in the mind of characters
whose psyche is damaged by their experiences,
and having even the music second-guess your memory of how it sounds
is really disconcerting.
It's cool getting the opportunity to see a work
very openly inspired by something else,
but also full of elements unique to itself.
Or should I say you-may-neek to itself?
What am I talking about?
The ending terminates disturbingly with this game over screen,
and this is actually the last we ever physically see of Lisa
in a series named for her,
though characters have visions of her everywhere
and her presence looms large in the rest of the story.
♪
Lisa, the Painful, also made in a version of RPG Maker,
has a very different approach entirely to storytelling
and more traditional RPG elements,
and what's surprising about it is that this doesn't distract
from giving the player an emotional through-line.
RPGs have a tendency to sharply divide their gameplay and story.
You level your characters and gather equipment and items and fight
and then reach the next story beat in the form of a cutscene.
Quite often you see fans of the expansive scope and story of RPGs,
but who aren't hugely into the parts where they have to battle monsters
or level grind between those bits,
or the opposite where they might even skip the story
to get to the part that engages them better,
the actual gameplay.
If you like both, you kind of have to like them separately
on different levels from one another
because they're ultimately very disparate aspects of the game.
The Painful's greatest quality is that it does everything it can
to be a synthesis of both of these elements,
making them complement each other so directly
that you can no longer really delineate them at all.
All the most involving story moments
also have direct importance on gameplay.
Losing all your characters or a party member
or having to play Russian roulette
and risk literally losing characters
to random chance to continue can be devastating
in the same way that in several battles
it's possible for a character to straight-up get killed
instead of KO'd.
♪
♪
By inflicting all the deaths and loss of the story
on the player mechanically,
by genuinely taking away everything they'd found
or characters they play with,
they're forcing the player to experience
the story aspects of the game on a direct level.
When something bad happens,
it's not just bad because you theoretically care
about these characters.
It's bad because you need those people
and you want those things.
Stop taking my things!
Speaking of things, those things are important.
Take, for example, firebombs.
They do a ton of damage
and inflict the fire effect on your enemies
and are very useful in boss battles
or with bigger fights against larger groups
or if you've already lost a lot of party members.
You might actually genuinely need the items you can find
as opposed to a lot of RPGs
where most of the stuff feels optional
or just, like, another potion or something.
This causes the player to invest more
in trying to find these things
which makes the game more engaging
and very effectively puts you into the role
of someone scavenging a broken wasteland
for anything of value.
I made a video last year exploring ludonarrative,
the idea that while games can have stories,
the actual story was the player's experience
of the game itself through its mechanics
and really engaging games forge an emotional perspective
for the player to occupy
through good execution of those mechanics
and Lisa might be the best game I've ever seen at this.
It's one of few games where I've had a bad outcome,
lost someone permanently in a hard fight
a long way off from my last save
or almost all of my party to Russian roulette
and continued because I'd come so far
and didn't want to have to go all the way back
or worse off, had no idea how much worse it would be
if I tried again.
I save scum like a madman in games when I can,
like I have a folder on my hard drive
full of Darkest Dungeon and XCOM saves just in case
but Lisa makes pressing on despite what comes by you
feel like the right thing to do
and always makes it inconvenient enough
that the alternative, loading a save,
feels like a punishment itself that you want to avoid.
You have to press on because the last save point
was way back there
and who knows how many people you'll lose next time.
There are several points where the player is told
to make a choice between losing everything they have
or a person's life or one of Brad's arms.
These choices aren't reversible and can't be worked around.
Losing one or both arms permanently alters
the mechanics and abilities of the one party member
you'll always have,
losing a party member whose abilities
you probably need to survive,
losing all the firebombs and equipment
keeping you alive.
These are all choices that are difficult
and each genuinely make the game harder.
You actually want, because of the game's mechanics,
to keep all of these people
because they're relevant not to the game's story
but to your ability to get through the game
and this means being forced to choose
is more painful than most other decisions in video games.
If these characters were just other characters
in the story that was also happening
while I was playing an unrelated RPG in fights,
this wouldn't have mattered at all,
but when someone threatens Terry,
your best friend, more on Terry later,
that means something.
These characters have mechanical value to the player
who might well have come to rely on them in fights.
Fascinatingly, most of the characters in your party
in Lisa don't matter to the main story whatsoever,
but I cared more about their survival
because they were important to me.
Having to choose to go without items to keep them
or learn to press on without them
because losing all your healing items
and money and firebombs just isn't manageable
is a real choice that you have to account for.
I can imagine having characters or items taken away
being frustrating for some players,
but it's absolutely fitting to this one story
and I do think that frustration is itself compelling.
The same way that having to send Simpsons hentai
to the brothel to keep them from losing their mind
completely was in Darkest Dungeon.
There's also a lot of random events
that trigger when you sleep to recover your health,
events like losing party members
and having to get them back
or everyone getting badly poisoned
or just stuff getting stolen.
These sorts of things create a quite genuine paranoia
in the player because, again, you want all that stuff.
You learn to only take the risk when you really need to,
and this paranoia puts you into the same sort of mindset
as Brad who sees Lisa everywhere,
looking down and judging him.
This, again, builds on a mechanic from Yume Nikki.
Random events happened in that game,
but they didn't affect the gameplay all that much
and they didn't even really affect the story
unless you're a pretentious weirdo
who likes to read into things.
Lisa builds a universe where you can randomly lose
someone important to you and that's scary and threatening
and makes you afraid to go to sleep in the game,
and while that's not technically a fair mechanic,
it's a powerful mechanic
and that's actually more important
than the game being balanced or fair.
The gameplay and story exist to get across the same ideas
and do it by affecting each other
in much more direct ways than most RPGs.
There's even a section where,
upon being told to choose between losing
what will probably be at that point your second arm
or losing all your items,
you have the third option of asking the character
why they're doing this to you,
and while you're briefly offered the chance
of seeing past this facade,
he then takes both your arm and all your items
as a seemingly purposeful attack on games
that offer easy ways out,
where you can sweet-talk your way past a choice
that it should have been hard.
The player is punished for believing
it would be so simple.
While it would have been easy to load a save here,
the first time through the game,
it felt so right for this to have happened,
to be punished for trying to avoid making a hard decision,
that I pressed on to the end regardless.
The game's use of tons of different status effects
with their own particular challenges
is also really fun, by the way.
They can be devastating,
meaning the player has to work to deal with them
instead of trying to muscle through it
by being higher leveled
or dealing as much damage as they can
and hoping that's enough,
so fights become engaging questions
that demand an answer.
Do I do the most highly damaging attack,
or do I try and stun them or knock them down?
I played a lot of RPGs when I was a stupid kid
or still more as a stupid adult
without ever really bothering to deal with status effects,
using attacks that dealt the most damage
and maybe using health items or phoenix downs,
interacting less with the mechanics
and having less fun because the game
hadn't really made me, conditioning me
to play it in a less fun or interesting way.
Being made to plan around enemies
which deal interesting status effects
and learning to have to use your own effectively
because otherwise you'll die
makes this basically the best RPG experience
I've ever actually had.
The game teaches you the importance of statuses
in a really straightforward way.
Your first party member, Terry Hintz,
is so poor at fighting that it's played for a joke.
This means one of the two moves you get every turn
at the start of the game is free to be wholly concerned
with using items and abilities that involve healing,
restoring TP and SP, or verbal bash
which can make enemies start crying and deal 50% damage
or get pissed and become far less likely to hit people
but also much more likely to hit for critical damage.
Oh, and sometimes they can also hit themselves
for massive damage too.
Terry Hintz might be genuinely one of the best pieces
of game design in the last 10 years.
Instead of, as in lots of RPGs,
handing you decent damage dealers
and then making the player only consider status effects
and healing when it's absolutely necessary
or when a designated healer class comes along,
the second half of your starting party
is functionally unable to hurt anyone
so you're handed an opportunity to figure out
how to make effective use of status effects
and items as early on as possible
and because of the game's difficulty,
if you don't, you're basically screwed
so you're forced to learn how to play
but in a subtle and suggestive way.
You can see that sort of consideration happening
in other aspects of design too.
One of the first key items to continue,
a child's bicycle because this game's great,
is only accessible through an enemy
that you'll need a full party
and a couple of firebombs to defeat.
Beating the boss means teaching you
the value of these items,
which makes scrounging for them
and holding onto them feel worth it
and deciding to use one in a fight
becomes a calculated risk
because you might have needed that later.
It makes managing to find some hidden
in the wild feel incredible
and, yes, it makes being forced to choose
between losing an arm and all of your things
into a genuinely nail-biting decision
because they're so goddamn useful.
I don't think I've ever felt so attached
to an expendable resource in a video game before.
This is, quite simply, genius.
And then when you do get the bike,
you'll notice that you can't move left with it
and drop off because your way is blocked
by this, uh, sports...board on a stick.
♪
You have to move right again.
Now, you probably already equipped it
because it's a new item,
so you pass into the other screen
and you naturally go too quick to see this gap
and you go over it thinking you'll drop down
but instead you hop over it
teaching you instantly what the bike does.
This little section,
this little section with this guy
and this bike is a very subtle tutorial
not just for how to use this item
but for the entire gameplay loop
that leads to getting it,
making careful use of items,
party members best serve using items
instead of attacking, building a party,
and gathering the resources to afford to build a party.
The game makes a joke about tutorials
having silly signs Terry left up
that teach basic stuff and mostly glorify Terry
but then it goes one further
and teaches you how to play it seemingly effortlessly.
Honestly, game designers like this
should be running our school system.
There's also almost no fluff to the game's mechanics.
The game's currency, dirty magazines,
hey, it's a world without women.
What else is gonna represent value?
is pretty rare.
There's not many to find in the world
or through side quests
and outside of a few specific areas,
there's no real way to grind them either.
There's a finite amount of people and mutants to fight
and almost all of them are unique characters
so since outside of grinding,
there's basically a precise amount of mags,
you can't buy everything you want
and don't have easy access to infinite healing items.
You have to ration them out,
make careful use of characters with heal abilities,
occasionally risk sleeping,
use the very limited firebomb resources in tougher fights,
and somehow in the middle of all this
afford to get new items and party members.
There's basically no free or simple choices in Lisa
and this makes almost every decision
in every encounter nail-biting.
It's very rare that games come along
that invoke this kind of anxiety in players.
Design-wise, Lisa equals XCOM or Darkest Dungeon
for its mechanical tightness and deadliness
and for its emotional tautness too.
It's also incredibly thematically interesting
to have so many things threatened
to get in the way of survival.
Characters being unable to perform at their best
because they're crying or drunk or hungover
or bleeding or depressed
or going through withdrawal symptoms
ties directly into the story of the game,
a story about characters whose judgment
is poorly compromised by trauma
or bad experiences or drug abuse.
Taking a step forward always costs money or items
or often a character's life.
The Lisa games are all about this sense
of losing pieces of yourself to a traumatic world,
often literally,
and trying to escape the worst of its effects
to limited results.
Some of the characters you fight
are quite clearly manifestations
of Brad's joy-altered psyche
giving life to his imagination.
The spiders you fight quite a lot in the painful
are very similar to the ones Lisa had to face
with the same man's face on them, no less.
In a setting like this one with a story like this one,
it makes sense to be confronted very often with scenarios
where everyone's just a little bit
too out of their right mind
to deal with what's happening to them.
Speaking of trauma,
the story of the painful is fascinating
in how it tackles similar ideas to the original
but in a more active way.
The first was a very internal conflict,
the main characters trying and failing
in their own imagination to escape an abusive life
and try to at least find some peace and calm
within themselves,
but instead they're repeatedly confronted
with their abuser and horrific manifestations of them
and what they inflicted on them.
I think the painful takes a more interesting
and considered road.
While you're trapped almost completely
in Brad's perception of his world,
his actions are real
and have consequences that affect others.
His choices in how he dealt with his trauma,
how he raised Buddy,
and how he reacts when she's taken,
these are all reactions to his experiences
and how they shaped his view of the world
and how to act in it.
I've spoken about the game's difficult choices,
but what's equally informative
is the places where the game takes choice away from you
or presents you with false choices
or doesn't even point out the alternatives
that simply didn't occur to Brad
because of the person he's become,
not entirely of his own volition.
Brad blames himself for what happened to Lisa,
becomes a martial artist as a post-hoc self-defense mechanism
against the abuse he suffered,
and raises Buddy the best he can,
but the best he can is to shelter her
from a world of people that hurt him and his sister
when they were young.
This itself paves the way for Buddy
to become the person she ends up being.
When she's kidnapped from Brad's care,
or perhaps to put it a better way,
escapes from Brad's care,
Brad immediately takes this as a justification
for perhaps what he's been training for his entire life,
a rampage in which all he does
is try to protect someone he sees as vulnerable.
Many characters offer Brad other options
or question why he personally
should be the one deciding how to raise
or deal with the existence of the only girl left in the world,
and he doesn't even really consider these questions
because for him, the answer was obvious.
He pushes past these questions
all the way to what a game would normally position
as a heroic final stand
where he finally starts to quite literally transform
into a monster and enters a haze of violence
where the background is just a chaotic swirl of colors
and even an army of enemies are horrified.
Brad is unable to pursue other courses of action
because of who his experiences have made him into.
The joy that he's become addicted to
is described as making you feel nothing.
It's very clear why something like that
would become a crutch for someone who's lived Brad's life.
By doing this, the story positions
a lot of traditional heroism tropes
as the result of a warped perspective.
One of the last lines in the game
before the final battle starts is,
"'I've been dead for 35 years. Today I live.'"
This is the first time in most of Brad's life
that the world makes sense,
him against what he sees as an army of villains
preventing him from being a father.
It's the only narrative that makes sense to him,
and the game encourages the player
to think about what went wrong
and why he can't think about it.
There are also places where the player
is offered a direct choice,
such as fighting or sparing his father
once he finally encounters him again,
which is itself a false one.
While you can choose to try to spare him,
Brad cannot resist himself.
This is an important creative choice,
or at least an honest one.
Everyone wants to believe
they're in full control of themselves,
but quite simply, sometimes we aren't.
Humans aren't rational actors.
Brad's been fighting manifestations of this man
all his life already.
What's one more?
The Painful is, fittingly,
a game about pain.
It's about the suffering we can experience in our lives
and how it can stick with us whether we want it to or not
and influence us in ways we don't always want to see
and in turn go on to make us hurt others
even when we think what we're doing is right,
and the hurt we cause impacts them too.
It doesn't always offer an easy solution.
There's no magical pill that undoes childhood trauma
or allows complete control of one's actions.
It puts out the scary idea that none of us are free
because we're prisoners of the events and lives we've lived,
but there's a certain hopefulness to it too.
For all his mistakes and inabilities to make better choices
and drug or trauma-induced violence
he can't stop himself from committing,
there are still real choices to make,
and these choices still have meaning.
There are places where Brad is marginally making things better
for some people or at least tries to,
and there are often times when you can literally choose
to lose pieces of yourself to try and keep others alive.
These little choices are meaningful and valuable.
The game rightfully acknowledges this by having multiple endings.
If you manage to outside of cutscenes
never take the combat-enhancing but addictive item Joy,
an item designed to be used in harder fights
that's quite difficult to go without using,
the ending is very slightly different,
and if you manage to finish the game in pain mode
where everything is tougher and save points can only be used once,
the ending is again just a little bit different.
I think the point of these endings
is that things can be different, even a little, if we try,
and that makes trying worthwhile
even if it doesn't always amount to something.
The point isn't that Brad is a good person
but that he has the potential to do better,
as everyone does,
and start asking the right questions about himself,
and this is a hopeful thing.
The final choice in the game is buddies,
whether or not to hug Brad and empathize with him
in spite of the pain he's caused her
and the life she will live as a result of this.
This is a difficult choice
and arguably an ultimately meaningless one.
Do you hug a dying man or not?
It doesn't matter, but it's a real choice
in a world of many false ones.
Brad wasn't a good person,
but he didn't have as much of a say
in what kind of person he ended up being
as he'd have liked,
and the idea that things could maybe have turned out better
and helped him make better choices
is the real hope of the story.
It's a hard-won victory to tell a story
in which nothing good happens to anyone
and the character you play isn't a good person,
but you're left feeling like people still have the potential
to do better.
This is something the final game,
Lisa the Joyful,
does its best to call back into question
with somewhat mixed results.
Lisa the Joyful's first segments
are an excellent microcosm of the positives
and negatives of its overall story.
It opens incredibly strongly
with a revelation about what Buddy was learning
during the upbringing we only saw in fleeting glimpses
during the opening of the previous game.
Buddy is forced by Brad to kill someone
in order to begin to learn how to defend herself.
This shows us how she was able to escape capture
so easily in the previous games
and lets us a little into how she'll have come to see the world
and, of course, showcases Brad's own views
about that world in detail, too.
I always wondered who killed this guy on the counter here,
and the answer is probably Buddy.
♪♪
♪♪
But then, after a cool cut to the title,
it cuts to black,
and we get some regular expository dialogue
about what two characters were yet to really learn about are up to,
implying various things about character relationships
and the reasons why the world is the way it is.
We then cut to immediately after the ending of the previous game
where things continue in Media Res.
These twin openings are an indicator
of the two roles the Joyful has to fill.
The Joyful was a stretch goal for the Kickstarter for the Painful,
the mission statement being that you'll play as Buddy
and uncover the truth behind the world of Lisa,
but it turns out those are very separate things entirely
and actually quite jarring when done together.
The world of Lisa is interesting and mysterious,
but part of what made it those things
was that you were exploring it as a byproduct
of a much more personal story
where the apocalypse was just a way of putting these characters
into more extreme circumstances.
Exploring it in more detail or explaining it outright
would have detracted from the engaging personal story,
taken time away from it,
and, well, it would have ruined the mystery.
You can carve a really sharp divide
between the parts that are about kinda just expositing
what happened in the past involving Lisa
or implying what happened to the world and who's behind it
and retroactively explaining the events of the previous game
and the parts that make up this really interesting story
about the last girl in a world full of monsters
trying to become its new ruler
by crossing every other warlord off a giant list
and becoming a little bit of a monster herself on the way.
The latter is really new and unique and interesting
while building on the themes and story we already know,
but the former is unnecessary and explains things
that don't need explaining
because they're not really what the story was about.
This doesn't just mean half the story
isn't as good as it could be.
It also drags focus away from Buddy's story
and weakens that half a little too.
It's not the worst thing in the world,
but I think more focus on Buddy and her choices
would have resulted in a much more engaging
and tighter story overall.
That said, the story that is there for Buddy
is honestly great.
Where Brad decided that for the safety of himself
and his loved ones, he had to close his problems off
from the world and hide from the people who threatened them,
hoping to keep them a secret forever,
Buddy learned the exact opposite lesson
and concluded that the only way to be safe
was to kill everyone who could possibly pose a threat
and take control.
She's literally crossing names off a list
and slowly imagining more and more violence around her
as she does so.
The fun thing about stories with parental dynamics like this,
similar to some chapters of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure,
is through one character's behavior,
you simultaneously get to learn about that character
and the people who made them that way.
A good deal of Buddy's behavior reflects back onto Brad
and the lessons she'd have learned
either through his direct teachings
or through having to live with someone like him.
You're still learning about precisely what happened to Lisa
and what she did about it through how Brad and Buddy act,
and that's fascinating.
The massive cast of party members from the Painful
is not a feature here.
You just get Buddy and temporarily Rando
while Buddy levels up and the player gets the hang
of her new gameplay style.
While I said having lots of characters
that you could choose from and risk losing was cool,
having less characters isn't specifically a bad thing.
Instead, the focus is on having one character
whose moves are more mechanically dense
than any individual character previously,
giving her both the ability to induce numerous status effects
like Flustered, Sleep, Bleed, and Poison
and a slew of generally good attacks, too.
Buddy's stronger attacks have a timing minigame
which can be quite tough to master
but are highly necessary for persevering.
Joy makes a return and the game's hallucinatory tutorials
from Buddy's psyche even quite strongly advise you to use it.
Apparently, the use joy messages were added in a patch
when players had trouble proceeding without it,
committed to not using joy the way many did in the Painful
because they knew there was an ending
specifically for not using it.
There is no such ending here,
meaning the joy mechanic can be properly used
by folks who skipped out on it before like me.
The story isn't the only thing that's divided.
The gameplay and story suffer from a much sharper divide, too.
Where the previous game had the almost magical interaction
between story choices and their gameplay consequences,
no such choices pop up for Buddy.
There are a couple of moments where you're given
the sort of typical moral choice of little consequence
you would see in inferior RPGs
like deciding whether or not to drop Rando into the pit
or whether or not to attack the pacifists.
It's a bit disappointing.
Worse, with the Rando choice,
it doesn't matter which choice you make.
It results in slightly different exposition
and maybe lets you skip a fight,
but the same things play out no matter what
with no further impact on story or gameplay.
But with the pacifists, there's this chilling aspect
showing how far Buddy has gone
where you can't even talk to them
and attempting to or even walking past them
asks you once again if you want to fight them or not.
Every few steps, Buddy has to actively choose not to murder,
which, of course, is the highlighted option
like it's her first instinct.
You're never given any really difficult choices.
You never have to risk losing any useful items.
In fact, there aren't really any of the rarer items
from the painful that would relieve harmful effects
in a pinch like the poison-curing cigarettes
you find, like, six of in the whole game
because lots of the tougher effects
have been taken out entirely to support a game
with largely only one character.
There's basically no point to the shopkeeper at all
and the main path through the game
gives you an abundance of joy,
so item management is basically gone
and all the party member reviving perfume you get
only matters for a very short period anyway
because you're on your own.
This ruins what could have been
a much more delicate balance of items.
Honestly, my expectations for the joyful
in the first hour were super high.
I was imagining all the different ways
a version of this battle system
but mechanically based around having
just one character could work.
Status effects, item management,
TP management, learning the timing
of the better attacks, making the best use
of your one turn per round in a fight
could become scalpel-sharp concentrations
of important choices and a robust inventory system
where defense and armor have to be balanced
against resistance or speed
or trying not to get stunned or tripped or poisoned.
This could have made for a really
mechanically dense game.
I was fully prepared to say that the joyful
had the best gameplay of the three games,
and while this theoretical version of Lisa
does almost rear its head in a few
of the tougher fights against larger groups
or if you commit to not taking Joy,
it never really feels like you're being challenged
in any way other than nailing the timing
on Buddy's more damaging attacks.
I think the gameplay is still overall
very fun and really challenging,
but the awareness of how much better
this approach could have been
makes it feel like a missed opportunity at times.
One of the best and sadly only examples
of gameplay and story overlapping
is that your other party member Rando's attacks
are also called Armstrong-style
because Brad trained him as a kid.
That's just really cute.
The soundtrack, in addition to containing
even more heavily distorted and speed-shifted versions
of previous tracks, has a bunch of new ones
with an increased reliance on samples
including new instruments, vocals, and even air horns.
I remember putting a playlist of Lisa music
on at a friend's house, and once it transitioned
into tracks from the joyful, he made me stop.
I really like the music,
not just because I have horrible taste,
but because its use in the game is perfect.
Tracks like the almost abominable
666 Kill Chop Deluxe play during tougher boss fights,
and it's not just fitting but complementary
to the sense of being trapped in the hellish storm
of drug-infused violence Buddy has become.
This soundtrack is the most complementary to a game
since Fallout New Vegas or even Planescape Torment.
There's something to be said about the engagement
I felt with the joyful.
In Painful, my first time through,
I was almost afraid to open it back up again
and see how much worse things could get for Brad,
find out who in my party I'd become attached to
I'd lose trying to find Buddy.
Joyful, fittingly for its title,
makes you feel like you have nothing to lose.
I took a break partway through Joyful
and couldn't wait to open it back up and finish it
and continue crossing names off the list.
There's something incredibly appealing
about Buddy's journey in spite of everything negative
I've said about the story.
Spoilers for the plot in case you somehow made it
this far without playing.
Eventually, Buddy kills everyone on the list,
but then because the ending needs to explain
the universe of Lisa,
what follows is almost completely unrelated.
Buddy suddenly meets the man who's behind everything.
We get some exposition, a fairly easy fight,
a few genuinely fantastic character-exploring
hallucinations for a bit in the middle.
Bozo explains the plot you and Buddy
didn't really need to know about,
and then Buddy gets to choose whether to mutate like Brad
or cure herself using the Joy vaccine
we just learned about
and raise the next generation of humankind.
This ending really kind of disappointed me.
Like, mutating into a monster has so far been a metaphor
for being taken over by your worst instincts.
The transformation is fueled by joy,
but wanting joy is fueled by having something
eating you up inside until the joy ate you up
and turned you into a monstrous expression
of those feelings, for example,
turning Brad into a monster obsessed with protecting Lisa
and Buddy by proxy.
I wrote the part of the script covering the painful
a year ago before I finally decided to play Joyful,
and what I liked about the problems
that appeared in that game is that they're not something
you can choose to walk away from.
You take those parts of you everywhere,
and you can't just erase them from yourself.
I literally wrote that there is no magic cure,
so having the game end with Buddy able to quickly
and easily choose to get over the traumatic life
that led her to be the person she is
instead of having to learn to deal with it
in the sort of personal human way
I'd come to expect from the series
was really jarring to me.
The skeleton of a really good story is still here,
but it's obscured by having to be all the other things
that it had to be,
and this really deprives us of the chance
to really explore Buddy and her choices
and how she would even go about moving on from all this,
but at the same time, I'm really touched
that this series about sadness and tragedy and decline
ends with a victim of abuse achieving what amounts
to some sense of closure or even a happy ending
and, earned or not, getting to put aside
their sadness and depression and self-loathing
and escape into the possibilities of the future.
I think it could have been done a lot better,
but I really, really like what it did.
In a way, playing this game as someone
who thinks a lot about design
and occasionally tries to make games of their own,
there's something inspirational about it,
like, the theoretical really good game
I wanted it to be doesn't exist now,
which means someone else gets to make that one.
That someone else could even be you,
and I think the truly fascinating power
about really good games is they leave people
with ideas about what they could do next.
They spread the ideas and concepts further
by being so good even if sometimes
they leave you wanting
or perhaps even by leaving you wanting.
Lisa owes a debt of sorts to both Yume Nikki and EarthBound,
which, of course, has inspired lots of other games,
including Undertale,
itself made by someone who also started out
making what amounts to an EarthBound fangame.
Some games are just excellent at spawning
this desire to add to them,
to create something using the ideas it leaves with you,
and, fantastically, Lisa is doing just that.
There's already at least two really fleshed-out Lisa fangames,
Lisa the Hopeful and Lisa the Pointless,
and who knows what great designers in the future
might say Lisa was the inspiration for their own projects.
In my opinion, Lisa is already doomed
to enter the stream of history.
I guarantee you 100%,
one of the future best games ever made,
one of the next indie mega-hits on Steam
or whatever platform will make it into the next decade
will be made by someone upon whom this game has left its mark.
It's kind of funny.
The games are all about trying to get over something,
move on from it, forget about it,
but we're going to see Lisa again one day
in a new form we might not even recognize,
and, personally, I can't wait.
♪ Listen in my head ♪
Hey, congratulations for making it to the end.
This thing has been a really long time coming,
and I know I didn't make many jokes this time,
but I wanted to do the ideas the game presents justice.
Please let me know what you thought of this one in the comments.
I'm genuinely quite interested in how this will be received.
I'd quite like to cover Night in the Woods
with quite a similar format to this one,
but I'd like to know what people thought of this one first.
My patrons over on Patreon support me making work like this.
Tonight, I'd especially like to thank...
...Avi Finkel, Rue,
Christopher McDonald, Femininja,
Naoto, Daniel Sullivan,
Justin Partridge, David Craggs,
Jordan Barrett, Torin Schofield,
Sam Bayliss, Rosetti,
Zodak, Whackman,
James Adair, James Id,
Patrick the Breezy Pea Finnegan,
Ah, it's a meme, meme, meme,
meme, meme, me,
Orevoixus at Ataliciousness,
Starman Nabi,
Alexander Wendler,
Jason Derso,
Mark Harmon,
Big Boy,
several rats, each armed with unknowable arcane power,
Anna Soti,
Dave Kemp,
The Joke Daddy,
Kubiza,
Lucas Gottschalld,
Wouter de Hoogde,
Christopher Wade,
Tyler Howard,
Isabelle,
Geeky Apart,
Hbomberguybutwithyaoihands,
Vagabond2b,
Al Swigert,
Hbomberguypleasereadhomestuck,
Okay, fine.
Sure, I'll finally start.
I still need to finish Problem Sleuth first,
but I'll do it, I promise.
Garrett Lathy,
I don't know, like a butt or something,
Kurt C. Yost,
Samuel Butler,
Gnostic Dude,
Ace Jenny,
Jenna Flynn,
Luke Swanson,
9D Guy,
Jacqueline Merritt,
Wargarble Smurf,
Michael H. Prey,
Elijah Scanlan,
James,
Feliz Den,
Niflet,
Gracie Lipscomb,
Joan N.,
I'm daddy's little bitch.
Mm, rub my nipples harder, please.
The words,
My Gold Ball?
But written in Japanese.
Handsome Unlimited,
Spunker McGraw,
Niltiax, Dealer of Souls,
Daniel Han,
Dalton,
Bee Movie, but every time they say bee,
I donate $10 to Hbomberguy,
Hero of Time 88,
Cal Ashton,
Andrew Gilley,
Rundfleischetikerungüberwachlungsaufgabenübertragungsgesetz.
Nailed it.
Besotten Jenny,
Aiden Yankovic-Sumar,
Garrett Mitchell,
Matthew Harris,
Rie Mansell,
MacArthur,
Momi,
Klil H. Neon,
Rikami,
Minty Freakin' Fresh,
Gar Internet,
Benjamin Davidson,
Sol,
Eytan Goldstrom,
Klaw Su,
Davis Remy,
Elliot Soden,
Aidan Bradley,
Daniel Stewart,
Chiboi Kami Kensei,
Jan Anders Bremer,
George Sorosh,
A Bowl of Creamy Tomato Soup,
Lauren,
Nathan Hoare,
Corwin Light-Williams,
Sean Higgins,
Richard Pearson,
René Larchaug,
Prokor,
Fully Automated Luxury Space Post-Scarcity Communism,
Poggington Jones,
Shadowbag,
Three-Fifths of a Brain,
Thomas Kistner,
David DeMazalou,
Ricard Hevosmar,
Zachary Clark,
Jerry Terry,
Garry Marshall,
Tom Martell,
Anna S.,
Kay Plays Dota,
Daniel Vincent Chilton,
Mike Stanley,
The Spectre of Communism,
Lissy Roberts,
Am I Edgy Yet, YouTube?
Mackenzie Cockerill,
Mon Silphoplatz Toonstrom,
Sammy J.,
Eugene Butler,
Jordan Tullis,
Owen Piper,
Recovering Zombie,
Jason Walter,
Caleb McMurphy,
Findley Bowick-Copley,
Parker Anderson,
Silas Pumpkins,
Sean Kemp,
David the Benevolent Malevolence,
Amy Lech,
Brennan Arts,
Alexander Corbett,
John Cantwell,
Marco Shard,
Eric Hunter,
Siegfried Slayer of the Immortal Dragon,
Robert Phillips,
Hero of War,
Cafxyle,
Alex Lemkowicz,
Graf and Blackpaw,
Jeffrey Theobald,
Jack Harvey,
David Rose,
Samael,
Scott Gertin,
That Was a Looski,
Alicia Parker Martell,
Kelly Mariella Kay,
Jenny Angel,
and Kieran.
Thanks very much for watching,
and have a great night.
I hope you're watching this at night, by the way.
If you're watching it in the morning, then...
you might have a kind of sad day.
At least it's not...
It's not for the...
It's not a morning thing.
🔔
