So, Greek myth time again. Last time it was dude and the embodiment of death.
This time it's a lady and an embodiment of sex and love and sex and...
mostly sex.
The Etruscans knew her as Turin, the Romans knew her as Venus, the Greeks knew her as Aphrodite.
Aphrodite!
The goddess of love!
Unlike figures like Hercules who became popular as characters,
Mind your own business, Venus.
Aphrodite is beloved in pop culture more as a symbol or an idea more than a character that does things.
Two of the most famous pieces of art in European history are of the goddess Venus.
Venus de Milo, thought to be the work of Alexandros of Antioch,
and Botticelli's The Birth of Venus, which gets homaged in everything from Lady Gaga videos to The Muppets to Andy Warhol.
And let's not forget name drops in pop songs.
He's Venus, in blue jeans.
I'm your Venus.
Oh, Venus.
Oh, I'm Aphrodite, alright.
Aphrodite.
Make me your Aphrodite.
But she does pop up as a character from time to time, and that's what we're going to look at today.
Said characters tend to draw on Botticelli's Venus a lot, at least in terms of their iconography,
but unlike heroic Hercules, or bellicose Ares, or wise Athena, Aphrodite doesn't really have any intrinsic definitive character attributes.
Most of her characterization tends to draw on what society thinks of a sexualized woman at the time that the media is made.
You can still share my bed.
Aphrodite is an interesting subject as far as modern iterations go, not because she is a love goddess,
but because the Greeks had such different ideas on love and what it even was.
The typical Greek love categories were agape, which was a charitable philanthropic kind of love.
You know, like love for mankind.
Philia, a concept developed by Aristotle, which is an affectionate, dispassionate, virtuous love between friends.
You know, usually between equals.
Aphrodite's domain wasn't catch-all love, but erotic sexual love.
Love in the sense of passionate desire for an object, but a feminine version of it.
Women in ancient Greece were basically considered subhuman, and let's just get that out of the way.
So the love-er is some guy, and the love-e of Eros is an object.
You know, typically women or teenage boys.
Greek attitudes on love and beauty were somewhat contradictory.
What we consider infatuation was, to the Greeks, considered a form of madness, like a mental illness.
And while some social classes in city-states had more favorable views on love, beauty, and femininity,
there were big influences from philosophers as well.
Aristotle thought that women would bring disorder, evil, and were utterly useless,
and caused more confusion than the enemy.
Socrates wrote,
Being born a woman is a divine punishment, since a woman is halfway between a man and an animal.
Aristotle wrote that the male is by nature superior, and the female inferior, as one rules and the other is ruled.
This inequality is permanent, because the woman's deliberate faculty is without authority, like a child.
Aristotle considered Eros as the love of desire, or acquisitive love,
and therefore egocentric, and object-oriented.
Eros or two say philia, or brotherly love. This is not a love between equals.
There were schools of thought that disagreed with this, of course, like the Stoics,
who wanted sexual equality and were much more pro-sex,
and things were much better for women in Sparta than Athens.
But the point is that the Greek viewpoint on love, femininity, and sexuality
was extremely varied, and overall way different from ours.
Erotic love wasn't an awesome fun sexy thing like we see it today,
but a scary maddening thing, more of a disease than a rite of passage,
hence why Cupid's weapon of choice is an arrow, you're struck by it.
Being madly in love was not a desirable thing,
which is why it was considered intervention by capricious jerk gods like Aphrodite and Eros.
And this isn't necessarily an idea relegated to antiquity.
Even modern writers like C.S. Lewis held this viewpoint,
that erotic love and infatuation is scary madness thing,
and we should have brotherly love of passionless discourse thought.
Like a lot of Greek deities, Aphrodite was something of a holdover from a pre-Hellenistic era,
which contributes to her being a bit of a contradictory figure
for a society that was so brrr-gone women.
Aphrodite is more like Zeus than any of the other goddesses.
She is married, but she sleeps around with whoever.
She's highly sexualized, but still a goddess, and therefore must be respected.
She's got the jealous spouse, the list goes on.
Aphrodite was also a much bigger jerk than, say, Hades.
She dealt in all sorts of godly interventions and eternal damnations and curses.
But since she is a love goddess,
and our modern idea on erotic love is so different from that of antiquity,
her modern portrayals are a bit all over the place.
Pop culture iterations of Aphrodite are imposing a modern idea of romantic love onto a character.
That was an embodiment of a different type of love.
A different idea.
And it's interesting to see how we portray a sexual goddess of love and beauty and desire
depending on what decade we're in, and how that decade feels about women and sex.
So, let's start back with the 40s.
It's not as bad as you think it's going to be, I promise.
To Venus, the goddess of love.
May she stay on the job and take care of all of us.
1848's One Touch of Venus is loosely based on the Pygmalion myth,
only with Venus in the place of Galatea.
And I guess that isn't completely out of left field?
In Ovid's Pygmalion, it is Aphrodite he prays to
to get his statue to come to life and be his eros, desire object.
A wealthy department store mogul Whitfield Savory II
buys a statue of Venus, and one of his clerks named Eddie
gets drunk and kisses her.
She decides that this guy is hot stuff for... reasons.
Venus also touches on how she's dealt with her past
mortal lovers in undesirable ways.
Again, not really a thing in the actual mythology.
What about this fellow, the one you turned into an owl?
Hip, hip, hip, hip.
About this?
So annoying that I finally had to turn him into a...
But boy, you want to talk about women, mythical Venus?
Smote for things like friendzoning guys
getting raped in her temple.
This is a very frivolous, light comedy.
The plot is kind of only loosely held together.
Eddie's disposable love interest is a paranoid nag,
but she ends up with his buddy anyway,
leaving the drunken statue-kisser all alone.
This stands in contrast to a 1988 remake
called Goddess of Love, starring Vanna White.
Watch Wheel of Fortune tonight at seven.
Yep.
Aphrodite.
With apologies, dear Father Zeus.
You know I prefer to be called Venus.
And this is why Vanna White's most famous role
is for not speaking.
Three thousand years I have lain entranced in slumber.
She is a statue for thousands of years,
and the whole world is apparently Goddess of Loveless
until the schmuck comes along with his
Corpse Bride contrivance.
Boy.
Girl.
Wedding ring.
Finger.
Really? That's what we're going with?
The drunk statue kiss made more sense.
Well, her goal is thus.
She will return when she has won
the heart of a man, and prove
that she can keep his love
without killing him.
There that is again.
But we're in one touch of Venus.
It was more cutesy.
You love another.
Oh, no, no.
If so, I shall crush her.
Crush her?
Crush her.
Well, I guess this makes sense
it was the 80s, you know,
the decade of fatal attraction.
In one touch of Venus, she seems to have
an effect on his sanity in the way that a deity might.
Here, it's more of an I dream of
genie vibe, up to
and including our supernatural dream girl
being a hyper jealous nightmare
contrasted to the mortal love interest
who is so reasonable.
It ends with her learning the true
meaning of love after all, after nearly
killing both of them, which oddly results
in her turning back into a statue
with the caveat that Zeus might backtrack
on that later.
I shall consider giving her a second opportunity.
Perhaps when the warm season ends.
This film also includes the
late 80s, early 90s shopping montage
and it is set to a song called
Shopping Scream
Shop Shop Shop
Shopping Scream
Shop Shop Shop
It's good that the song is telling us what was going on
because I would have been really confused
otherwise.
She's gone crazy!
Look at these mortals!
Losers! Isn't this awesome?
Aphrodite is a recurring character in both
Hercules The Legendary Journeys
and Xeno Warrior Princess
and she wears pink a lot
because 90s.
This makes me yearn for the humble dignity
of Anna White.
Was that a boner?
Hercules is the more goofy of the two shows
but probably one of the best that captures
how petty and arbitrary and selfish
and self-aggrandizing the Greek gods are.
Aphrodite is all of these things.
Boring!
You bore me! These bore me!
Love bores me!
Despite that, she's one of the most likable.
More than anything, the Aphrodite
of Hercules The Legendary Journeys
reminds me of sheer horror wits from Clueless.
If the government could just get to the kitchen
rearrange some things, we could certainly
party with the Hadians.
Here she has a very early 90s idea
of what an idealized physical
beauty is.
Tubular! Which is funny to see her age into the
late 90s.
By late era, Xena, her look was pretty
dated, so they changed it up a bit.
Hephaestus is here too.
He's hot-ish in that he's not like
the ugliest ever, but he has a rad
face scar, as is Eros
who is called Cupid. Oh my god, oh my god
girl arm.
What up?
Look, get to the
point, mom. I'm real busy.
See? Young aspiring
actors never lose hope.
Aphrodite also has some of the best lines.
Aphrodite, you got her off!
And while she has a nice brother-sister
relationship in Hercules,
with Xena, it's more vain and bored
and spiteful and jealous of
Xena a lot, because women.
Her appearance is in Xena. At first, she's much
more into the whole cat fight and jealousy thing.
But on the plus side, she actually
has a character arc over the course of the series,
starting out as this, like,
spiteful, mercurial goddess
and eventually growing to give a shit about
mortals, specifically Gabrielle
my little one.
When eventually Xena starts killing
the Olympians, God of War style,
Xena got there first.
Aphrodite is not on her shit list and is
more of an ally. And by this point, she's
wearing her angry lingerie, so you know she
means business. See, she never
liked that Xena, but she likes Gabrielle,
so she's allowed to live into the
seasons where the show got really
squirrelly. Aphrodite is in the
original Clash of the Titans.
Barely. She's in the background
for a lot of it, but only has a handful
of lines.
But Zeus transformed himself into a glittering shower of gold
and visited her. Her big contribution
to the narrative is Perseus' awesome
new sword, and that's about it.
Well, she does get name dropped
during Medusa's backstory.
But she was seduced by Poseidon.
They made love in the temple
of Aphrodite. She transformed
her into an apparition
so horrible.
Yeah, seduced, so
that's what we're calling it.
The Adventures of Baron Munchausen
is...
it's
Terry Gilliam. It's very Terry Gilliam.
Venus is played by
Uma Thurman in her very first film
role.
The whole film is hung on the most
dreamlike of logic, so I will
try to explain it, so...
after Robin Williams'
giant floating head king of the
moon threatens our heroes for about
20 minutes, they fall off the moon
and land
inside Vulcan's volcano.
Hephaestus, here in the form of
Vulcan, then takes them to tea.
See what I mean when it sounds like someone's weird
dream? And Venus shows up once again
on her Birth of Venus clamshell, and
um...
I believe cucks is the word?
Well, what happens next is a
manosphere fever dream where she flirts
and dances with the Baron, while
nice guy Hephaestus goes unappreciated
even after all those diamonds he made for her.
Another diamond.
Every woman above the age of
nine in this movie gets the hots
for the Baron, and Vulcan is jealous.
And that is one of his traditional traits,
by the by. He is like the male
Hera, so bizarre as this movie
is, it ends up actually being one of
the more faithful to its original myth.
And because you jerks chose Aphrodite
that obligates me to finally
yes, I looked at God of War.
Thanks.
Kratos.
It's been far
too long.
God of War follows a demigod named Kratos
who is basically out to kill Zeus and
the Olympians, some of them,
because revenge and destiny and stuff.
In God of War 3, there is a
scene where he goes to Aphrodite and
finds her engaged with her handmaidens.
Come on, really?
The gods have
truly blessed you, Kratos.
This is like a parody.
I mean, it's totally
respectable and
not silly at all.
I have no time for games, Aphrodite.
Aphrodite tries
to seduce Kratos, but, you know, he's too
badass to be interested in women.
And then she tells him to do a thing, and then
I guess he's not too badass because the
player now has the option to be interested
and it cuts to this.
Ah,
I
grew jealous of our
mistress.
Such power.
If it's this good watching,
just imagine.
Is he
going to?
By the gods!
Usually if a woman says that
and responds to a man engaging in a sex act,
it's not
a good sign.
The magic of video
doesn't capture this, but DualShock actually
shakes with Kratos' thrust.
I'm actually
kind of surprised there are more depictions like this.
You men and young toys.
On occasion, Aphrodite appears
as a mentor figure.
2011's Ecupid was a
micro-budget gay romance about a
long-term relationship on the rocks.
How would you feel about some
words of wisdom from a gal who has seen a
thing or two?
Venus is played by Morgan Fairchild by way
of a strangely supernatural-ish
app who is here to give our
main character what he thinks he wants so he can learn
a valuable lesson about love.
What have you learned?
Venus is all about monogamy in this one.
The goddess aspect is subtexty.
The Ecupid software is created by
divinity and Venus is only
referred to as such in the credits.
And we don't actually see her until the end when
she appears as a helpful waitress
and she shows up to give us the moral
of the story.
What you know in your head
is what you feel in your heart.
The incredibly
vague moral of the story.
And of course there is the criminally
underrated Disney version, which is
the best one. No, I'm not biased.
Is Aphrodite in the 1997
movie that precedes it?
Well, technically.
Here, and again here,
and here,
and that's about it.
But she's one of the best things about the animated
series, which is one of the best things
Disney television ever did.
Aphrodite, Aphrodite,
Aphrodite!
The goddess of love!
She usually shows up when someone
beseeches the gods for something love-related.
Oh, and she's voiced by Lisa Kudrow.
My best friend, Icarus, is in love
with my other best friend. Wait, wait, wait. Are they both human?
Uh, uh-huh. Just checking. Go on.
In one episode, Hades wants a
prophet, not to find out whether the taking
over Olympus thing will work out like he does
in the movie. Aphrodite!
Oh, sorry. But to find out if
Aphrodite will go out with him because he has a big crush
on her. I want to ask her out on a
date, but as you can probably imagine, I
don't handle rejection well. Making him probably the
only Disney villain who is actually
interested in a romantic relationship.
Well, you know, I mean,
a consensual one.
How did old man Pygmalion
land a vision like that?
There is a Galatea episode and she gets
involved there, where Hercules decides
to emulate Professor Pygmalion,
who is a character, in order
to get a date for the big dance.
Hercules wants a dream girl, but of
course the only attribute he cares about
and asks for are physical ones.
I really like tall girls.
Ugh.
And also that she's obsessed
with him. Oh, okay, so beautiful
and crazy about you. Good.
Diggin' deep, huh? Women are people too,
Hercules. And that's why
they don't like you. That was stupid.
Mm-hmm. And selfish. And shallow.
And sexist. Okay! She shows up again in
the Medusa episode in an ironic
role reversal. Here she's actually
helping her, if only in that typical
Disney love yourself the way
you are sort of way. Well, real
friends will like you for who you are, not
what you look like. And offers her glasses
that prevent her from turning people into
stone when they look at her, which Medusa
eventually comes around to, but not before
working for Hades for a little while first.
Orientation? I run a professional
organization. This episode
also has one of the best digs at the Disney
company in all of Disneydom. And we're
not employees. We're cast members.
Ugh. Modernizing Greek
myth is always a popular one.
She's not in the Percy Jackson series much.
There she is.
And her daughters are.
In a deleted scene.
Woof. I'd count that as a good
thing that this was cut, but
there's not much about these movies that are really
all that salvageable regardless.
And finally...
Everyone has a soulmate
somewhere in the world. Remember this?
Yeah, me neither.
Valentine was a CW show that aired in
2008, and it focused on
the Valentine family, a group of gods
living amongst humans in modern
day LA. Aphrodite
is the family matriarch who runs a matchmaking
company called Valentine Incorporated,
which brings soulmates together.
The employees of Valentine Incorporated
are a bunch of matchmaker gods who have to
keep their love god identity a secret
for some reason. But their god
methods just don't work in modern times,
which means trouble for these gods.
Mortals are constantly creating
substitutions for human interaction.
You see, if mortals don't start to
love properly, then the gods
start to become mortal.
Do you know what happens to gods who become relevant?
They become mortal. That's right.
The eternal gods of Olympus are becoming mortal
because of Snapchat.
Man, remember when women
were considered malformed versions
of men and were basically property?
We should go back to that.
That was when love was real.
As Greek god TV doesn't seem to sell well
looking at you, Hercules, the animated series,
this was cancelled after eight episodes.
So that's it for our look at Aphrodite,
a character who fluctuates with our
attitudes on sexy women throughout the decades
as well as who is
creating that image, be it Disney
or Terry Gilliam or...
Yeah, so
next episode, we are tossing
it up with the theme not being a person
but a thing, namely
a thing that happened. So here are your
options. You can vote for it here
and in the link below this video.
Should be interesting.
Thank you for watching and
see you next time.
