I'm sure you've all heard the expression, the moon is made of cheese.
Understandable because the moon does look a bit like a big round cheese,
but in fact the correct expression is, the moon is made of green cheese,
and the first written record of it comes from John Heywood in the 16th century,
as part of a collection of old sayings. But of course the moon isn't green, so
where does this idea come from? Is it possible the original saying,
going back centuries before Heywood, was that the moon is made of cream cheese,
and ancient beliefs are often based on a kernel of truth?
Cream cheese is a carbon-based compound made of elements that are commonly found
throughout the universe. This is what it looks like under a microscope.
So is it possible that a similar compound does exist on the moon?
We know that cheese is formed when proteins break down into peptides and then amino acids,
and finally into carboxylic acids through a process called liposilis.
Now you might think, surely you can't get proteins on the moon,
they're complex organic chemicals. Yes they are, but amino acids are not,
and we know that amino acids are present on the moon because they've been found in meteorites.
So there's no reason why the same chemical process that turns amino acids into carboxylic acids on
Earth couldn't happen on the moon. But is there any evidence for it?
When Apollo astronauts came back from the moon, NASA announced that the samples they
brought with them were volcanic rock, and they said maybe we could mine the moon for
valuable minerals. And because everyone trusts NASA, no one questioned it.
But I'd urge you to check for yourselves. This is what moon rock looks like under a microscope.
NASA claims it's volcanic, but here's rock from the Earth that we know is volcanic,
and it looks nothing like the supposedly volcanic rock they found on the moon.
So what does it look like? Well let's go back to that
microscopic image of cream cheese that we saw earlier. Notice any similarity?
But why, you might ask, would NASA want to fake all this? Well just follow the money. Here's
NASA's budget as a percentage of the federal budget over the last 60 years. You'd have to
be blind not to see that their most profitable years were when they were sending rockets to
the moon. As long as they can keep up the pretence that there are valuable minerals there, they can
ask for billions of dollars in funding. But the movement to expose NASA's fraud
is growing. There's currently a debate over this issue in the scientific community,
so you need to keep an open mind and listen to both sides of the argument.
There was a huge controversy earlier this year when a peer-reviewed paper was published
providing more evidence that the moon is made of cheese. The reason you haven't heard about this
is because as soon as the paper was published, the author was fired from his job stacking boxes
at a Walmart superstore, ostensibly because he forgot to refrigerate a carton of blueberry
swirl ice cream. But the real reason is that he dared to go against the scientific consensus.
Not only that, everyone who's read the paper mysteriously disappeared
or ended up dead in a dumpster. The only conclusion we can draw-
NO!
I apologise for that rant by my evil twin brother, but he was going a bit too far with this
conspiracy. Just in case anyone was beginning to doubt it, the moon isn't made of cheese,
but I suppose some people will already be sufficiently convinced that they'll just assume
I'm part of the conspiracy to cover that up. After all, people are prepared to believe videos
that claim the Earth is expanding. If I'd made up something mildly less absurd, like
the moon is going to crash into the Earth, it would be very easy to dazzle gullible people
with lots of numbers and diagrams and convince them of anything. Don't just take my word for it,
try it yourselves. Think up the most outlandish conspiracy you can, in other words a conspiracy
of scientists to fake data to cover up what you think is the truth, and build on it. Don't just
make stuff up out of thin air, do what real conspiracy theorists do, make it plausible.
Cherry pick some real facts, just make sure you draw the wrong conclusions.
It's surprisingly easy and actually quite fun. So in this video I'm going to look at why people
trust blogs and videos like these more than science textbooks. Of course there are psychology
papers that have studied the problem in depth, but their conclusions are not rocket science.
There's a pretty obvious pattern in why people are drawn into believing junk science videos and
blogs. The trick is to shame them into thinking they're closed-minded and stupid if they just
follow what they're taught by the government, i.e. science teachers, but smart and enlightened if
they believe in a conspiracy that few people know about. You may have failed science at school,
but now you're somebody. You're on equal terms with a Harvard professor.
And use certain buzzwords that I've seen come up time and time again in discussions with
conspiracy theorists on my channel. One of the most popular mantras is do your own research,
which of course doesn't mean pick up a textbook and learn about the subject, it means google
blogs that are easy to understand and echo your newfound beliefs, and blogs that are dressed up
to look like peer-reviewed scientific papers. Oh yes, that paper. Well, the journal of eclectic
science is a journal my evil twin brother made up. All it takes is a build your own webpage app.
The journal also contains cutting edge research into spoon bending, and there's a paper showing
that Elvis is alive. If you think that starting your own scientific journal to promote your
beliefs is a bit far-fetched, well it's already been done. This impressive looking journal was
started by two Irish brothers who submitted their own papers to themselves, peer reviewed
their own papers, approved them without changes, and published them on their own blog, which they
called Open Peer Review Journal. Now you might think, who in their right mind would fall for
something like that? Well people do, and they're citing it. When I floated the idea that the
internet might be seriously undermining real science back in 2011, I said this.
When Cliff Clavin expounded his knowledge in the barroom at Cheers, he had an audience of less
than a dozen people. These days, Cliffy would undoubtedly have his own website, and to disguise
the fact that it's written by a mailman, he can make it anonymous, or he can give himself any
title he likes, and claim a specialist background he doesn't have. That was eight years ago.
In fact, I first mooted the idea more than five years earlier than that, at a time when people
still knew who Cliff Clavin was. But back then, I still found it hard to believe that a useful
tool like this newfangled internet could be responsible for undermining two hundred years
of published science. Surely I thought normal, intelligent people wouldn't fall for this.
We'd never have, say, a President of the United States gullible enough to believe whatever he
sees on the internet. Look, it doesn't matter if this was a Republican or a Democratic President,
we should all be concerned if our leaders are this easily misled.
It's ironic that we now have a world of information at our fingertips.
People can check any fact, from the mass of Jupiter to the chemical constituents of asparagus,
without having to hunt through their local library. And yet the result has not been an
increase in public knowledge, but a dumbing down. What are people learning? That evolution never
happened. That putting crystals on your body draws out negative energy. And yes, this really
is a growing belief that the Earth is flat. In April 2018, a YouGov poll found that 7%
of Americans now think the Earth is or may be flat. That's 23 million people,
in one of the best educated countries in the world. It's not often I agree with creationist
Ray Comfort. In fact, I don't think I ever have. But he did manage to get this one right.
If you're a Christian, and you believe that the Earth is flat, please keep it to yourself.
Even if you have Bible verses that you think prove it, verses that are obviously metaphoric.
This is because in many people's minds, you'll be perceived intellectually on the level of someone
who thinks the moon is made of cheese. If they know you're a Christian,
insisting that the Earth is flat won't exactly help your credibility.
Yeah, I wouldn't want to make ourselves look stupid, right?
Behold, the atheist's nightmare.
But it's not Christians Ray has to worry about. Most of them have no problem with science.
It's his fellow fundamentalists. According to the same YouGov poll, the more religious you are,
the more likely you are to believe that the Earth is flat. That's not surprising,
because people who are inclined to see a conspiracy in one field of science
tend to believe in conspiracies everywhere. Tony Heller, whose blog is full of climate
conspiracies, also gives vent to the idea that the Sandy Hook School massacre might have been
a conspiracy, as well as the conspiracy theory that Obama was born in Kenya.
The guy who made this video about a flat Earth also thinks NASA faked the moon landings.
Once you start believing everyone's conspiring to hoax you,
that means everyone's conspiring to hoax you.
The fact is that all these conspiracy theories use exactly the same modus operandi. Cherrypick,
misrepresent, misquote and invent a fictitious motive for the conspiracy,
which is why it'll be so easy for you to build your own if you want to try it.
The reason for this growing trend in conspiracies is best illustrated by the YouGov survey on flat
Earth belief. The younger you are, the more likely you are to believe in a flat Earth.
94% of people over 55 accept that the Earth is round. Only 66% of millennials do.
And where do millennials get their information? No prizes for guessing.
Don't just take my word for it. Look it up yourself.
There it is again. Do your own research.
Now, there's nothing wrong with that if you want to look up how the ancient Greeks worked
out that the Earth was round over 2000 years ago and how it's been confirmed by every branch
of physics since then. But of course these videos are aimed at people who aren't that much into
science. They're not going to bother with textbooks and educational websites that contain
complicated things like numbers. They'll google sites like this.
After all, 5% of respondents say they used to believe the Earth was round,
then as recommended they did their own research and came to the conclusion that there's some
merit to the belief that the Earth is flat. So it's pretty obvious where they did their research.
Google searches may not convince them that the Earth is flat,
but it exposes them to enough bullcrap to sow a seed of doubt.
That's all junk science needs. Once you believe scientists might be faking everything,
you'll move quickly on to why, and that leads to the argument that they're doing it to get
more research grant money. Why else? So let's see how this conspiracy works.
In my geology class there was only one high achiever who went on to do a PhD.
This isn't her by the way. The rest of us were just humdrum geology graduates who took up
well-paid jobs in the oil industry because the intellectual demands aren't that great and the
money is good. Most of my classmates went on to senior management roles in the oil industry
where the pay got even better. Helen, the one who did the PhD, could have easily landed a similar
job because she was the smart one. But she wasn't interested in an industry job. She was motivated
by a burning interest in geology and a desire to make new discoveries and further the limits
of scientific knowledge. Don't be surprised some people are just like that. The obsessive
inquisitive nature of researchers is how science has advanced for the last 500 years.
In the years after graduation Helen never mentioned that she'd been initiated into this
secret worldwide conspiracy but here's how it must have gone. After Helen successfully applied for a
grant to study carboniferous ocean environments her tutor would have broken the news to her.
Sorry Helen but if you're going to find any evidence that's going to overturn accepted science
in other words everything that's already been published you're not allowed to publish that
you have to fake the data to cover it up but there will be money in it for you.
Let's just imagine Helen didn't tell the tutor that this was an outrageous request
but she's curious as to how anyone can profit from such a duplicitous scam.
Her tutor would have told her you'll get grant money it will allow you to do more research
and when Helen asks what's the point in doing more research if that entails simply faking more data
and never coming up with any discoveries her tutor would have said no point at all your entire
research career would be pointless you'll never stand out and your work will never be recognised
or produce anything groundbreaking or original and you'll never benefit financially the only benefit
that you get is to continue this charade until you retire without any self-respect and then die
to which Helen must have said sounds like a plan to me and that's why she supposedly took up a
poorly paid research job faking data all to get grants to do more data faking rather than simply
move into a worthwhile and well-paid job in mining or oil exploration or dam construction and not
only Helen agreed to this the same conversation happened with every PhD candidate involved in
these controversial areas of science they joined a conspiracy that involves not only researchers
but also journal editors Nobel Prize committee members everyone who works at geological surveys
around the world the Royal Society the National Academy of Sciences and a host of other scientific
institutes and presumably their spouses and partners apparently they're all in on it
when I made my last video the story of the earth in 33 minutes I seem to have triggered all the
various conspiracy theorists from creationists who didn't accept evolution to flat earthers who
refused to accept that the world is round there were people who didn't accept plate tectonics
or the role of co2 in climate change even people who believed Osama bin Laden was still alive
or that he was a US government agent and bin laden was only in the video as part of an interesting
story about geological unconformities the weirdest conspiracy theorists of the lot were those who saw
a conspiracy in the fact that the video was 33 minutes long I had no idea what they were on about
until I looked it up and apparently the number 33 has some sort of dark masonic connection
well that's a bit awkward we can kiss goodbye to most scientific solutions if they're going to be
put in a conspiracy basket whenever they use the number 33 remember my video was simply explaining
what geology students learn at university there's nothing controversial about it but those who've
decided some of this conflicts with their religious or ideological beliefs want the
subject taught with those bits taken out well sorry science doesn't work that way it isn't a
pick and mix all the disciplines within geology are interconnected every piece of evidence is
related to and supports other pieces of evidence ignore one part and the rest makes no sense
like pulling away the leg of a stool but if you're already convinced that scientists are
conspiring to fake their research then it's obviously no good me trying to provide evidence
because evidence comes from peer-reviewed studies and of course you'll just believe these are part
of the conspiracy so I'll just say this peer-reviewed studies are the basis of all
scientific research they're the basis of science textbooks they're the basis of everything science
students learn at the university they're the basis of every piece of technology you use
and the standard of living you now enjoy even if you didn't know it for example this paper by
watson and crick and this paper by kerry mullis are the basis of dna analysis used for everything
from catching murder suspects to breeding endangered animals and they're the basis of
gmos that give you things like cheap breakfast cereals studies are the properties of cathode
ray tubes in the early 20th century led to the development of television this paper was one of
several landmark papers that established plate tectonic theory that's used to predict earthquake
patterns and mitigate earthquake disasters even medical papers which are most frequently prone
to errors because of the nature of the subject are still robust enough to make huge advances in
treating illness and disease and peer-reviewed papers are still paving the way for technologies
of the future and don't forget each of these landmark papers was dependent on hundreds of
other peer-reviewed papers that went before them which the authors cited and the landmark
papers themselves have been cited by hundreds of other papers that came afterwards and advanced
our scientific knowledge even further so before you start rubbishing peer-reviewed papers that
are the basis of science it's worth finding out how you've benefited from them and taking a leaf
out of my own subject you're benefiting from the system of peer-reviewed scientific publishing
every time you fill up your car knowing where to look for oil is no longer a matter of dumb luck
it's dependent on understanding different rock types their stratigraphy their physical properties
their faulting and folding patterns and their ages so the next time you find yourself musing
about how peer-reviewed studies can't be trusted while you fill up your car with gasoline and mutter
that the best way to advance science is by sitting around a table giving persuasive arguments
try instead to spend those 60 seconds thinking about where the knowledge to find that gasoline
came from and give thanks to the geologists who used it to find not only your gasoline
but also the minerals that make up your car you're welcome but if you still think that
geology is nothing more than a huge conspiracy or just the link between earthquakes and plate
tectonics or the link between plate tectonics and co2 or the link between co2 and climate or the
link between climate and evolution or the link between evolution and plate tectonics if you think
any of these connections is a hoax then there's no point in teaching any geology to the next
generation of geologists because without each link the whole discipline falls apart so you might as
well fire the mineralogists and the well loggers and replace them with bloggers and youtube video
makers who thought up their own science through persuasive argument just go with what's on the
internet abolish universities stop all the research burn all the textbooks stop pumping
the gasoline abandon your car made of metal and walk back to the 14th century
thanks again to all those who are supporting this channel by donating to my favorite charity
i'm delighted to pass on an email i got from them saying that donations from my subscribers
have now reached 63 000 and one very generous donor gave 18 000 which is mind-blowing this has
allowed the model of providing health care in exchange for reforestation to spread to other
parts of the world like brazil and madagascar and here's some important news until december 31st
all contributions will be matched by a generous outside donor so anything you give between now
and the new year will be doubled if you don't know what this charity is or what it does please take
a look in the video description because it really is groundbreaking and i've been to borneo to see
the work they do for myself even if you're a conspiracy theorist and you've come to this
channel just to promote your pet conspiracy you're doing that for free so why not give a few bucks to
charity for the privilege if they had a penny for every conspiracy that's out there they'd already
be fully funded
