Hello, I'm not legendary game designer Lorne Lanning,
so I don't know why you're wasting your time here.
But, hey, while I've got you,
I recently passed 100,000 subscribers on YouTube.com,
and after three months and one official complaint
to YouTube management,
my plaque finally arrived to confirm it.
Anyway, it seems to be customary for YouTubers
to do some sort of Q&A video
when they hit a certain amount of subscribers,
and I love answering questions.
I love discussing stuff.
Uh, so I really felt like I should do one of those.
I put out a thing, uh, months ago
asking people to provide questions
that they thought would be good for this sort of thing,
and I also held back a couple of questions
that I got on Curious Cat
I thought would be worth answering on video.
So, uh, we're gonna do that now.
How old are you?
Okay, I actually, um, made, like, little bits of notes
next to some of the questions that I thought,
oh, I might forget this when I'm actually recording it,
and for some reason, in brackets, I put,
it's 25 here.
I'm not really sure why I did that.
I must have very low expectations of myself.
Anyway, yeah, I'm 25.
I've kind of looked like I was 14 for most of my life.
My hairline has always been this far receded,
so you can't make fun of it
because I'm comfortable with this.
I fully expect to go bald within the next three to six months.
I can't wait, to be honest.
You know, I've never really cared about my appearance,
as you can tell from just the way I dress and look.
You can't let yourself care about your appearance
when you look like me. It would destroy me.
So I've always kind of just messed with my hair.
I've always kind of grown it out super long for no reason
and then shaved it all off just to see what would happen.
Usually, it's looked rubbish, but I've never really cared.
One time, I dyed my hair, like, really, really yellowy blonde
for a video that I ended up deciding wasn't worth making,
and the time for it has passed.
It was a music video starring me as Milo Yiannopoulos.
It's probably the most extravagant thing I'd ever done,
and I dyed my hair for it, and it had to grow out,
so it was like eight months of awful hair
for a piece that I decided to not make.
So if you're wondering why my hair was awful
for a long stretch of last year and this year, that was why.
I actually made it with two other friends.
One of them was the musician who composed a bunch of it,
and the other one sort of helped out on set
when we were shooting it,
and that guy also had a camcorder
and was filming the whole process,
including me dyeing my hair, so there's, like, a good...
There's a good two-hour rubbish documentary
about the hijinks that we got up to attempting
to make this thing that I ended up never finishing.
It looks like it's working.
I can feel something happening,
but I can also see my skin getting kind of reddish.
Maybe I should edit that together for patrons.
That would be a fun thing to do. Let me know.
Anyway, I'm done hijacking that question
and to ramble about my hair now, so let's move on.
What's your favorite piece of fan fiction of any kind ever?
You specified of any kind,
which means I get to take wild leaps,
so nice one there.
My personal favorite fan fiction ever
is a film that came out in 2014 called The Guest.
The Guest is really, really good, by the way.
You should watch it. It's really, really good.
Dan Stevens, amazing in it.
British people represent.
That film is very clearly
Chris Evans-era
Captain America fan fiction.
It is very deliberately a guy on the run
from a S.H.I.E.L.D.-style organization
trying to be a good person, live his own life in a world
that no longer suits him.
The serial numbers have been filed off,
but there is a very clear S.H.I.E.L.D.-type organization.
I mean, it might not actually be at all.
There might not have been anyone's plan whatsoever,
and I've just read into the film.
It wouldn't be the first time,
but for me, it's just a really, really good film,
and it has enough little things in there
that it qualifies as this kind of rumination
on the kind of super soldier
that Captain America is in the more recent films,
and I think that's kind of interesting.
It's also just a really good film.
I am now, however, going to give my favorite fan fiction
that's an actual fan fiction
so that I've actually answered the question properly.
As for my favorite piece of actual fan fiction,
you have to go with My Immortal.
It's really funny.
It's definitely a parody of other fan fictions
and the fights that happen when people collaborate on them.
It's definitely a parody.
I—if you don't agree that's a lie, it's not true.
I'll see you in hell.
It's—it's good, and it's funny.
This next one's a long one.
Great.
Could you recommend some good social sciences literature
for beginners or other literature
that has influenced you the most?
I'd love to be as articulate and good
at critical thinking as you.
That won't be too hard.
Many of my acquaintances are right-leaning
and pretty racist, sexist, homophobic, et cetera.
Still, I feel like I could easily give them
a bit of perspective if I only had enough knowledge
and good argumentative skills.
People have asked me for reading lists quite often.
This is kind of a question that I held back
because it's emblematic of a lot of questions I get.
If I were to come up with, like, a list,
it would just be just a lot of books
from a variety of different categories
because quite often something really simple
that isn't really about any particular issue
informs your perspective a lot,
even though it's not even covering it.
So rather than, like, just give you a list
of all the books I happen to have read
or pretend that I'm educated enough
to know how to construct a reading list for someone else,
I'm just gonna give some general broad strokes
sort of recommendations for how to educate yourself
and then give some actual recommendations.
So I think I would first recommend
looking at the basic ideas
that underlie any particular social science.
So, like, psychology, sociology,
the other humanities, you know, the rest,
whatever you want to call them,
they exist for a reason to study a specific thing
and they usually have some kind of specific goal in mind.
So, like, psychology is the study of human behavior
but also has the kind of goal
of making people more healthy.
I once read this little tiny book
from years and years and years ago,
it was really old,
called Psychoanalysis for Normal People
and it opened with a statement that said,
what's the effect of,
the purpose of psychoanalysis
is to make you ready for anything, something like that.
That, to me, was this sort of,
aha, you know, this is why we do this.
It's not just, ah, we're checking to see what would happen
if you lock people up in a fake prison.
It's we're trying to learn how we behave
in different contexts so that we can better understand
contexts we can create that enhance human behavior.
You know, can we educate ourselves out
of certain behaviors that we exhibit?
I'd basically recommend you go to the source,
look up the reasoning behind why a field of study exists.
Like, why do people do psychiatry or psychology
or sociology or any of the other humanities?
Why, what is its purpose?
What is it looking at?
And what are its methodologies?
And why is it beneficial to use them?
I think a lot of people lack the sort of
base level understanding of what it does and why
that makes the whole thing make sense.
So I don't think, I'm not sure if I have it anywhere,
but when I was in my third year of university,
I was doing an English and film degree,
so I had lots of free time.
I actually just started buying science and sociology books
off of people who were doing either like a master's
or were finishing and were selling their books.
So I could just, out of interest, read what they were like.
And that was kind of a, I guess, a flashpoint
for my own understanding of these concepts,
was bothering to just pick up a basic book on it and read it.
In fact, I'm going to look for it now.
Carry my portable recorder with me.
I keep a bunch of books back here,
and I'm pretty sure, I'm pretty sure my old applied,
my old applied psychology book is here somewhere.
I literally just like, there was a girl
who was just finishing a master's and she was leaving,
and she was selling all of the books that she bought
because they're expensive.
So people want to buy them used.
Ah, the set is too big.
It's in the way of my library.
So they just started selling all the books.
And here we are, I found it.
It's next to my Call of Cthulhu third edition book.
Well, I don't know what edition is actually.
And also my collected works of George Orwell.
This is why I don't have much of a system for this library.
Ah, so this was the book that I,
this was the book that I bought just for the fun of it.
One of these, I have a couple others
that I got off different people.
And they're just books where they're basically
just a primer on what the issue is.
The most interesting part of the book for me,
as someone who wasn't as interested
in the social sciences at the time,
was the preface, the introduction,
and the, yeah, like, this was it.
This was the eye-opening moment.
1.1 of the introduction, what is applied psychology?
Like, it opens by explaining what it is
and what it's for and why you would care.
And that's the most important part of these books,
in my opinion, is explaining why it's valuable,
why you would use it, and the purpose of approaching things
from that perspective in the first place.
Because that's the part that, in modern discourse,
people ignore the most.
They go immediately to the idea of this imagined intent
that any psychologist or economist who disagrees with them
or any kind of feminist-leaning person in the humanities
clearly has this agenda, when the agenda, if anything,
is spelled out already, and you can read it.
And they've clearly ignored that to go,
no, they want to collectivize everything
or whatever it is that they say nowadays.
This isn't the one book you have to read.
But I would basically recommend picking up basic primers
in any of these fields and just reading through them.
This was a fantastic read.
I basically just skipped through it the first time
and just whoever had bought this before me
had done their own markings, so I just read those bits
and checked it out.
It's really informative.
Another book I would recommend while we're doing
basic primers that you would do in a university level
is Literary Theory and Anthology.
It's the first book I got when I was in university.
And I'm just gonna go over to my little bookshelf
that I actually just got in so I can have more stuff,
so I have more stuff on this set.
What are some good ones?
I'm not a very good educator.
I can't be like, oh, here's all the stuff
that you need to read first
before gender trouble makes sense.
I don't know.
I don't know what it is.
I didn't understand it until I read it,
and then I did, so if there's some magic other step
that a smarter person would tell you to read first,
I'm sorry, I don't know what it is.
Conquest of Bread is good.
It's good.
I'm just gonna unequivocally recommend that you read it.
It's good.
Just have fun.
Pedagogy of the Oppressed is really good as well.
Simone de Beauvoir's The Second Sex is really good,
and it's big, but it's worth reading,
and it's lots of little chapters,
and each of them has something interesting to say,
and it's cool.
My favorite book of the list of things I've got right now
is Hannah Arendt's The Origins of Jesus and Sadism,
and it's really good because,
well, not this good, actually.
Do not buy this version.
Half, like, all, like, this side of every page
is grayer and harder to read.
Don't buy this version, but I had another version,
and again, like, I just lost a bunch of my old books,
but this is really, really good,
and I think it's that and perhaps some, like,
Zizek books are,
I wouldn't actually recommend any of his books, though,
are the most informative to my perspective
on how I approach a lot of issues, how I think about them,
and they're really good at getting you to question
how you approach an issue in the first place,
which is the thing I wanna stress.
You need to go, like, why am we doing this?
So, like, if you want to talk about these issues
to someone who doesn't understand them,
then the thing that they're probably missing,
first and foremost, is an understanding
of why it's important to approach things
from that perspective or from any perspective
in the first place.
A lot of people, the way they're currently thinking
naturally occurs to them,
and they wouldn't even think to use another approach,
so I think the purpose of a lot of this work
is to sort of plunge you into another perspective
and make you think from it.
A lot of writing on politics is written to be seamless,
to be like, oh, this goes down easy,
and this all makes sense,
and it complements the way I already looked at the world.
Like, all of, I was about to say all of Michael Moore's
books, but I only ever read one of them,
Stupid White Men, I think it's called,
is rubbish because it's so convenient.
Like, it just, it goes down so easy
that you don't actually learn anything from it.
You just go, ah, yes, these people are bad,
whereas I think a lot of the books
that I've just recommended are like,
oh, this is a way of looking at things
that I didn't have before,
and that's, like, more valuable almost.
In a way, I have a better understanding of
and appreciation for left-leaning ideas
because I've read so much right-wing bullshit in my life.
Every major villain in human history
has written a manifesto about why they're doing it.
Read that.
I wish I had a copy of Mein Kampf to hold up and go,
also read this because it's informative
and I think it's important to get the most
accurate understanding of the perspective that informs it,
but I don't actually have a physical copy
with me right now because the one that I recently bought
had to be returned because the text
went all the way into the spine.
It was incredibly poorly published.
Mein Kampf became public domain last year
and now exists in hundreds, if not thousands,
of versions and printings that are rubbish.
Also, by the way, if you're in high school,
do not ask your high school library
to get you a copy of Mein Kampf.
You will go on a list.
I don't know what's scarier in Mein Kampf,
the fact that you can feel yourself being propagandized,
you can feel yourself being almost convinced
of the thing that he's saying,
or the part where, you know,
it's just outright racist ideology,
or the bit where there's a bunch of advice in there
for how to act in modern politics that still works,
that's still 100% good advice
for how to be good in politics.
Like, that's scary in its own way.
Like, I'd recommend reading it
if you can stomach that sort of thing.
That was kind of a bit rambly
and there was a lot of books in there
and they might not even be the best books to start with,
but I hope that helps.
Thanks.
I noticed that you rarely discuss gender, sexuality,
diversity, or other SJW issues
in your non-measured response videos,
e.g. Fallout, Soulsborne, Braid.
The closest thing was talking about Irene
in your Sherlock video.
Is this an intentional choice?
If so, why?
If not, do you think there's a reason
why you keep that shit packed up?
Or is this all in my imagination?
I don't keep them divided on purpose.
I do think that I try and make everything
with the same kind of perspective in mind.
I don't like the idea of there being a break
in the kinds of content I make.
At the same time, I do think I talk quite a lot
about the ideas
and what they might mean for us as players
in games quite often.
Like, Dark Souls 2, I think,
has something really interesting to say
about its world, but more importantly,
about our world and how to live in it.
How do you live in a world
where you might not actually,
basically, have ever existed
because you'll die and be so completely forgotten
that it doesn't even matter?
Like, how do you act in a world
where that can happen?
I think it asks really interesting questions.
I don't like turning that kind of work
into a manifesto where I go,
oh, no, this is what this means
and this is how we have to live our lives
based on Dark Souls 2 telling us,
you know, I could do that,
but I have this, I guess the term is,
I guess I want to avoid being preachy,
and I think people are very quick
to dismiss people as preachy
if they just don't like what they have to say,
but I also want to avoid being it.
Some of the stuff that I'm working on right now,
especially the Deus Ex Human Revolution video,
which is the current long project I'm working on,
I always have a long project,
does deal quite a lot with social topics
and the points,
and I guess it'll be my most SJW game analysis
just because it comes up more
because it's a game that prizes itself
so much more on story than Fallout 3
or the Souls games do.
In fact, they pride themselves on not having as much.
Are you single?
No, sorry.
Do you think that it's possible to be friends
with people who exhibit alt-right traits?
Is it possible to overlook such negative qualities?
That is a cracking question.
It's possible.
I know people who are like,
oh, I don't believe any of this,
but I can be friends with them, that's fine,
but they're usually people who don't have anything to lose
from the views of those people.
You know, if you want to,
let's take the most shitty definition of alt-right,
you know, like they want to build a white ethnostate.
Usually it's easy to be friends with those people
if you're white.
For me personally,
it's not possible to be friends with people
who exhibit really far-right beliefs.
Either I immediately start arguing with them
and, you know, there is no friendship,
or I sort of consciously remember
some of the shitty things they say
and just think less about
wanting to hang out with them again.
I have a friend who sort of shifted further right
in the last couple of years,
and I just stopped talking to him.
Like, not on purpose,
I didn't deliberately blank him or anything,
I'm not that sort of person,
but I just thought less and less
about that person in my life.
And that's just kind of how people are, I think.
I think there are probably people
who have thought less about hanging out with me
because of my far-left beliefs, you know?
That's just kind of how things work, isn't it?
Did you build your computer yourself
or pay to have one custom-built?
The first computer I ever had was custom-built
by this guy called Jed,
who I really looked up to and thought was cool.
So I was like, after this, I'm gonna build my own.
And then I bought an iMac and I used that for years.
But then I realized that I liked PC games
more than I liked having a slightly nicer version
of Photoshop, and eventually I built a PC
that could actually play games, and it was great.
And I've built my own PCs ever since.
What's your advice on long-distance relationships?
Oh, fuck.
You know, like in a lot of relationships
where you see the person every day,
you can get into this routine
where it just becomes normal to hang around with that person
and that's nice.
But I think if you're in a relationship
where you don't see each other as much,
it's important to make the times you are together
really special and feel really important.
You basically have to have a better relationship
in a shorter amount of time.
So make sure that you do that in whatever way you see fit,
because I don't know what that way is.
What color is your toothbrush?
It's blue and white.
How did you support yourself financially
before you were drafted into the culture war?
Okay, for about six months before I started making videos,
I was an IT engineer, and then I realized
that they were underpaying me
because they could get away with it.
So I quit and I started doing animations
for the School of Life on their YouTube channel,
which was fun.
And then I realized that that video I'd made
like a year ago by that point had done really well
and I could probably have made more
because the audience actually existed
despite me assuming it didn't for quite a while.
So then I just started making stuff in my spare time
while I was finding more work.
And then I stopped having to find more work
and it was really cool.
So that was that.
Prior to that, I had just got out of university
and I worked in a chip shop while I was at uni
for a couple of weeks and then I quit
and then the place got closed because of rats.
Have you ever played the LucasArts Adventures?
Not really.
I've heard they're really good
and I have no reason to disagree
because what I have played of them is good,
but I've never finished one or played it for that long
apart from the first Monkey Island.
I'm really more into the kind of weird adventure games
where you can die easily and they were made
with a very precise sense of humor
or they were just like shoddily put together.
Like there's something fun about playing bad
point and click adventure games.
So those are the ones that I've sought after as a child.
I was absolutely in love with Shadow of the Comet
and Prisoner of Ice growing up.
They're just fantastically,
just like not that great games,
but they're just fun enough that you do wanna keep playing
and you wanna know how the story ends
and you also want to experience the horror
of the game breaking or not working properly
or something that you never thought you had to do
hours before killing you.
Like they're that kind of school of game.
There's a fantastic part and I think it's Prisoner of Ice
where you're supposed to be looking around for an exit
and you're just off the screen
and there's nothing on the screen
that you can find to be going
where we're supposed to be going.
There's nothing there.
You walk the character off screen
and the character comes back and says,
there's more stuff here.
The camera turns and there's more stuff.
Like the game hits a point where it's just fucking with you
just like to see how much it can make you play.
And by the end,
you get a choice of two endings in Prisoner of Ice
and they're both basically the same
and they both end with the same cut scene
after this little bit in the middle.
And it's like, they were just testing to see
if I would bother getting to the end
and I lost by doing it.
Like I failed the test.
So those are the kind of games I got really into
instead of the LucasArts ones,
which always seemed kind of well-made and polished
and that just wasn't my style.
I actually think I own one of the few physical copies
of Limbo of the Lost,
which is a point-and-click adventure game
I'm gonna do a video about at some point.
I wanna do a video series about obscure games
not many people know about.
Limbo of the Lost is one of them.
It's a point-and-click adventure game
with assets just stolen from Oblivion
and Morrowind and Enclave and a bunch of other games.
And they just sold it.
Like people paid money to buy this game
and it's like basically theft.
I'd love to do a thing just looking at it
because it's also, alongside that,
before I found out all of that
and also then checked and found more myself,
that it's just such a bad game in so many ways
that it might be a game I played the most in my life
just to inspect it.
Sometimes you play games to sort of understand
why they were made
and a lot of bad point-and-click adventure games
do that better than any other game genre.
So it also means I missed out on a lot of the good ones.
So at some point I wanna go back
and play more of those,
but instead I'm more of the like kind of weird French ones,
the illegal ones,
and also really like some of the King's Quests
are really good.
Police Quest, Space Quest.
God, there's a lot of quests I just realized now finally
after all these years.
Gabriel Knight as well.
All through the Gabriel Knight games,
I like these obscene...
The first one's all right.
Like it's nice art.
The puzzles mostly make sense.
And then Gabriel Knight 2 and 3,
are just these like bizarro nightmares
that don't make any sense.
I mean, everyone kind of at this point knows
the cat hair mustache puzzle from the third game.
Imagine like me as a child
trying to like having to look that up
and going, why would you do this?
And it turned out that that was put in by producers
or something like they requested
some particularly hard puzzle for some reason.
I think it might be to sell strategy guides or something.
Hey, I recently rewatched your Undertale vid.
Any chance we could see a video about your disagreements
with the ideological implications of the game theorists,
even if it's just a short patron only vid for instance.
This question was asked in June
before the Lisa video came out
where I kind of do cover some of this, but no.
I also kind of liked leaving it
and that kind of vague comment and then moving on.
There's something funny about not fully explaining it.
But basically I think they reflect a perspective
that is sort of unhealthy to have about games
where you kind of inspect them for canon.
I think it's almost a crime to think wrong about games.
So game theorists are bad.
You know, for me, the fun of Sans
was that he's this kind of silly weirdo
who's clearly hiding something.
And finding out what that is
and getting this explanation during a fight
if you choose to play the game a certain way is really fun.
And I kind of think it almost takes away from that
for someone to go, ah, yes,
but I've gone over it with a fine tooth comb
and trying to piece together the comprehensive story.
Like, whatever story you turn up isn't as interesting
as the story you experience just playing it normally.
Um, that's, uh, it's, eh.
What's your guide to consuming inhuman quantities of media?
You seem to have seen slash read like fucking everything
while I take weeks to watch
like a single fucking season of a series.
Uh, I also do that.
I'm still partway through Recreators,
which is an anime I really like,
and I just stopped and haven't seen it again for a while.
And I don't know why I do that.
I do that with tons of shows that I really like.
I love Kino's Journey, and I still haven't seen,
I think, either of the Kino's Journey movies that exist.
And, like, why did I, why have I not done that?
That's stupid.
I have the same problem.
I just, uh, but the trick is to, uh,
watch things and remember the contents of them
as much as possible so that you then
can just call them back anytime.
Like, I'm 25.
I've had 25 years of consuming media.
I've seen, you know, all of the episodes of The Simpsons
that were out when I was, uh, 14.
I'd seen all of them because they were what I watched
as a kid, so, like, I have, like,
access to every event from, you know,
every quote from The Simpsons from those seasons
is just there in my head somewhere.
Just try and remember the things that you watch,
and you'll eventually have this huge backlog to refer to.
I don't watch that much stuff.
I still don't even watch the things that I like.
I make videos about games quite a lot now
for a living, basically.
I don't actually play that many games anymore
because making videos is so time-consuming.
Have you thought of doing a general election video?
It would be cool to see your political positions.
However, I can see how this might be divisive.
This question was made on the 1st of June,
and my answer to that question was,
oh, that's a good idea, and then I made a video about it.
So thank you, whoever asked that question,
for giving me the idea to make a video that
ended up doing quite well.
So I also want to do more political-type stuff
in the future along those lines, so thank you
for asking this question and changing
the future of my YouTube channel forever, whoever that was.
So I guess my answer to that question is thanks.
Does that count as an answer?
Do you feel that people are naturally good and made bad
by their environment, naturally bad and made
good by their environment, good is spelt with an I,
or blank slates entirely shaped by their environment?
I think that people don't have a nature.
I think that humans, if they have one key thing that keeps
happening is they change a lot.
Everything is always different with humans.
If you look at things from any measurement of distance
or time, we behave radically differently,
given just a couple of years or generations.
And the English language itself has altered radically
in the last few hundred years, and it kept changing.
So there are just periods of history
where if you move this person here,
you couldn't even understand them.
And from that perspective, of course our behavior
is going to change a lot, because the society
that we're in has a huge impact on it.
But because humans build society,
obviously it's not something we're completely
unable to control.
To a certain extent, no one's really in control of anything
and no one's to blame for any crimes.
Basically, the answer is it's too complicated
for anyone to understand, and we're in big trouble.
What do you think about Homestuck, if you've read it?
I've never read Homestuck, and I might never get around
to it, but I probably should at some point.
It looks okay, and everyone who talks about it
is very opinionated about it in some direction
or the other, and wow.
There's a picture going around of me and a friend
being yaoi'd, a woman drew us in an embrace,
and someone else drew a version of that
where we were Homestuck characters.
That's the most interaction I've had ever with Homestuck,
and I plan on reading it, but eventually.
I have no solid plans.
I might eventually read it, and I'm sure I'll love it.
That was a joke.
Any thoughts on the Dishonored series?
Dishonored series is really good.
It's really good.
It's really well made.
It's a really good immersive sim.
I was absolutely amazed by the level of just control
that you have over outcomes of encounters.
Like, I was kind of starved for games where you can just go,
oh, this person lives from this encounter,
and they come back, and it actually impacts the story,
even if it's just a little tiny way, it's good.
I really like the Dishonored series.
I haven't played the newest thing, Death of the Outsider.
I hope it's good.
I might actually do a thing on the Dishonored series
now I think about it.
Like, there's a lot to say, actually,
about the complexity of its design.
I probably should've thought to do that earlier.
Thanks, Question Asker, for reminding me
of a video I should make.
This question comes from Justin Partridge on Patreon.
Are you reading any new comics regularly?
Like, do you have a pull box somewhere?
I don't read that many new comics.
I tend to wait until the comic is done,
and then I can just read the whole thing through.
So I'm really looking forward to Black Panther, Black Bolt.
Those both sound really, really cool,
and I like the bits of them that I've seen.
I'd like to read them in full,
but I don't tend to read that many new comics.
And I also stopped reading web comics, like, regularly.
I started just going, oh, wait, six months or two years.
I mean, a huge burst.
I did that with Gunnakrig Court.
I read all of it, like, immediately
when I first heard about it,
and then I waited, like, four years
and then read all of it again.
It was great, and now I'm waiting again.
Max S. on Patreon asks,
does asking if you're going to do
a Vampire the Masquerade Bloodlines video count as an ask?
Because I know you said you were going to do a New Vegas one,
and those are both in your Fallout 3 list.
Yes, I am eventually going to do it.
I actually have a specific idea for this in mind.
The best video essayist on YouTube bar none,
Noah Caldwell-Gervais, did a video
covering two of the games that Troika made,
and he says that Vampire the Masquerade Bloodlines
doesn't hold up like he remembered it,
and it's actually quite bad in a lot of ways,
and that sounded like blasphemy,
but now I'm worried that he's right,
because, like, he's right about a lot of things,
so I'm probably going to do a video directed at him
where I specifically go, oh, yeah,
and go through it and see if he's right.
I think that'd be a really interesting video to try doing,
so, um, who knows?
Like, I haven't played it in quite a while,
and I remember really liking it
and thinking it was really good.
Am I going to have to, like,
retroactively apologize for that list
and go, like, ah, no, one of these was bad?
Like, that's a really cool video to make, actually.
I should make that sooner than I expected to.
This one comes from Alex Scranton on Patreon.
Who or what inspired you to toss your hat
into the fuckery of the YouTube gaming ring?
Were you always just interested in the criticism side,
or did you start by watching LPs or something else,
and what content creator would you say inspired you the most?
In terms of video game-related content,
there isn't much, but I really liked the tone
set by the people at Shut Up and Sit Down.
They've been doing board game reviews for years,
and even their earliest stuff
is just, like, really funny and well put together,
and I think that was the most directly inspirational
in terms of the idea that you could make this stuff.
I don't think I have any specific inspirations
in terms of the kinds of content I make myself, though.
I think it came from more of a place of realizing
that people have emotional responses to things
that they don't understand.
You know, like, I didn't enjoy Fallout 3
for a lot of reasons that I couldn't really articulate
when someone asked me why.
I think a lot of my videos are basically me
trying to kind of, like, explain why I felt the way
that I did in the first place.
It's kind of, like, taking steps backwards
from the visceral experience of playing the game,
if that makes sense.
Since you're pretty much the only famous
No Man's Sky apologist,
you should do a retrospective video
on the things they've changed to the game
and how they impact the vision of the game
as it was released, and really,
whose fault is it that Hello Games
ended up having such a terrible reputation?
Spoilers, it's Sony's fault.
Um, as someone who really liked specifically
what No Man's Sky was when it came out,
the fact they've changed it to be a lot more like the game
they apparently promised to people
I didn't pay attention to the marketing,
um, worries me a little bit.
I'm worried I'm gonna go back to it,
and it's not gonna actually be the thing that I enjoyed,
but if more people can be happy with the game it is now,
then good for them, I suppose.
No Man's Sky is a game that released in early access,
but they didn't tell anyone
that it released in early access,
which is a bold new strategy,
but also probably illegal.
Um, they probably should have just said,
it's gonna be, it's early access.
They could have just done that.
I'm not the biggest fan of early access as a business model,
but it would have made it a lot more.
At the same time, I appreciated the goal
of releasing a finished game that was empty and lonely.
I loved that.
Are you still developing that game?
Yes, I am spending ages on it.
I'd originally planned for it to be a challenge
where I do all of the writing and animation
and art and programming and music,
and then I slowly kind of realized
that I can't do all of that
because I'm rubbish at most of it.
So I should hire on people who can do all those things
and try and at least make it ever exist.
So a good portion of the last couple of months
has been me figuring out what parts of the game
I actually am comfortable with it being me making
and what parts I feel like I should outsource
to other people.
I'm now at the point where I'm explaining the idea
and the concepts I want to use in the game to other people.
And that's cool,
because it's kind of letting other people in
on the ideas that I've had
and finding out which ones are ridiculous
and I shouldn't be using
and just don't make sense to everyone else
and which parts actually do make some sense.
And also being forced to elevate a pitch your game
or describe it to someone else who has to weigh in on it.
I honestly think that collaboration between people
and having to explain yourselves to more people in a group
is more valuable than being one person
who spends years saving away
with a perfect vision or whatever.
I guess the answer is yes, I'm still developing that game,
but eventually it will be more than me
and maybe one day it'll exist
and I hope it's good because I've spent so long on it.
What is your favorite Blind Guardian album?
Night at the Opera, no question.
I even wrote Night at the Opera, no question on this.
It's the best full album.
I really like some of the songs on Wheel of Time
and Twisting the Myth,
but Night at the Opera is the whole package.
It's all good.
And yes, I did discover Blind Guardian
through the Robot Unicorn Attack heavy metal version.
I'm basically a cultural void.
That's all the questions that I could be bothered to answer.
Thank you all very much for watching.
You can reach me on Curious Cat
and I'll respond if I think it'll be interesting to do
and I won't make a fool of myself.
I might keep some back for a future video.
I kind of wanted to do a 150,000 subscriber one as well
and then I passed the 150,000 mark
while I was waiting for the plaque to arrive to do this one.
So I might eventually just do a 150,000 subscriber special
when I hit a different milestone,
so I'm always just a little bit staggered behind.
That might be a funny joke.
I'm also kind of thinking of just doing Q&A stuff
more often for backers.
I want to do a thing where, like,
people who back me a certain amount ask a question
and then I'll do a video answering them
and it'll be a nice, fun time.
I kind of want to do these kinds of videos more often.
I kind of am actually, you can probably tell,
I'm building a set and when it's finished
and also when it's warm because in the winter
it's freezing in here, I'm going to stream from here
and I'd love to do, like, Q&A streams from here
every now and then where I answer questions
asked by patrons, so let me know what you think of that.
I didn't write an ending for this video.
Bye.
Bye.
