So I've been kind of sad and bitter and full of rage lately for some reason
And so since Disney is the source of all my ills
I of course spent a lot of time on Disney Plus in the last few months
After watching Moana for roughly the 400th time, I started watching the Little Mermaid a lot
So we're gonna talk about the Little Mermaid
Well, this is this is the brand now
And all of the effort it it deserves you get nothing
So why the Little Mermaid?
Well, I kind of wanted to reevaluate how my feelings on the movie had changed
Because I was mildly like a detractor at some point in history. I think I don't know
I don't remember the 2000s very well, but my opinion is now that the Little Mermaid is good
Actually
Not the greatest ever, but you know pretty good
And so around my 10th Little Mermaid rewatch in the month of April
I found myself revisiting all of the mermaid discourse of the time along with the Disney Princess discourse in general
You know in the 2000s early 2010s
I am ambitious, brave, strong, romantic, imaginative
You're totally repressed
Cause not the Disney dudes, we're just some damsels in distress
And in this state of brain decay, I now find myself
wondering like
Was all that necessary?
What are you gonna do about it? I guess I could stand up for myself. Yes. Yes
No, I'm trying to not wait for a man to save me
Like am I the only one who remembers the lazy Disney pop feminisms of the 2000s?
Because I'm gonna go out on a limb and say that those hot takes that called out Disney movies as not being girl boss enough
I'm not under the sea, but standing on dry land
The moral of my story's changing for a man
These criticisms that have been incorporated into like 10 Disney movies ever since
Lions! Attack!
Let's go girls
Have aged more poorly than the movies themselves
Especially the Little Mermaid. So we're making a thing out of it. I guess I'll make it into a list
I mean lists used to do well in the algorithm. I don't I don't know if they still do
Pathetic
And we're gonna do it in two sections
First we're gonna talk about the bad feminism of the 2000s and 2010s because that's something I haven't really seen much
Re-evaluated and then the gay shit because it's pride month. It's time to talk about some gay shit
Let's go lesbians. Let's go lesbians
Excuse me, lesbians coming through. So this is like the top
Something number
About the Little Mermaid
Somebody should find that poor animal and put it out of its misery
Part two something something feminism
so one thing I feel like we kind of need to I don't know metaphorically smash is the lens of the lazy pop feminism of
The late 2000s through which we have all for some reason agreed to view Disney Princess through
Did I have to assume you made a deal with an underwater sea witch where she took your voice in exchange for a pair of human legs?
No, good lord, how would you do that?
Wait, you got engaged to someone you just met that day?
Yeah, anyway, I'm a lesbian
Yeah, anyway like for a while in the late 2000s these memes are all over the place
Save a prince's life with her only asset her sexuality
Did did we even watch the same movie?
stupid
So in addition to this really lazy one-dimensional bad faith reads of all these movies
We also had the princesses are bad role models for my daughter's movement a 2007 article by Barbara Ehrenreich reads
Disney likes to think of the princesses. This is how I assume she talks
Disney likes to think of the princesses as role models, but what a sorry bunch of wusses they are
Typically, they spend much of their time in captivity or a coma waking up only when a prince comes along and kisses them
So the thing about Disney Princess is it's not a trope. It's a brand
It's a literal trademark the Disney Princess brand reached its peak in the late
2000s and was the undisputed leader in princess merchandising today is a perfect day to get married
With its major move in the year 2000 being when it decided to package princesses Snow White Sleeping Beauty Ariel Bell Cinderella
Jasmine Mulan and Pocahontas under the same marketing umbrella
This move spawned a sales juggernaut Disney and 300 licensees sell
25,000 princess themed products by the year 2007. The franchise was worth 4.6 billion dollars
I feel like what people are grasping for is a critique of a sort of capitalist
Indoctrination that Disney is so effective at with children and it is valid to question the way that it follows people through their entire lives
Hell I am living that right now
But how to quantify the way that that affects people in such a complex system is really difficult and arguably impossible
So the way they went about this was to try to make a coherent narrative a through line if you will if
Girl like Disney Princess then later girl can't be CEO and girl boss
Take for instance this the dumbest critique from the Women and Work Commission
Reporting on gender and opportunities gaps found that while girls are outperforming boys at school and at university
They still earn less than men and the pay gap may be widening
One of the main reasons for this says the Commission is that little girls spend too much time in the Wendy house
playing with dolls or
Pretending to be nurses while their little brothers want to be Bob the Builder from an early age girls are being socialized
It seems for the caring soft feminine jobs that perpetuate gender stereotypes job segregation and lower pay rates
Yeah, so it's totally valid that like childcare and caretaker roles pay less girls shouldn't want to do those
They should want to be Bob the Builder you've had a busy day that not really
Okay, so let's ignore how fucking shitty it is that with these people just accept that extremely labor-intensive
Caretaker jobs just deserve to be paid less because feminine the consequence of Disney princesses
Isn't that little Riley here isn't going to lean in and be a CEO
The consequence is that she's going to grow up with nostalgic feelings
Towards the Disney Company and go to Disney World once a year once she has little Riley's of her own
Where do you find a Mickey pretzel at Magic Kingdom? And is it a snack on the dining plan? Well
Come see us at Disney parks mom's panel.com
and that is worth interrogating but to frame Disney princesses is inherently harmful because they might
Widen the pay gap or something is just so inherently dishonest and kind of revealing Lee
Misogynistic in its own right the question of how the Disney brand indoctrinates children is a question with no clear answers
And it's not really compelling enough to get people mad to click on the clickbait
So they have to frame it as Disney princesses are harmful. Actually
McKaylee might end up as a nurse instead of a CEO
Ariel is the reason for the wage cap
So while I think these discussions are worth having it turned real stupid real fast like we went from
Hmm how might Disney princess influence girls self-perception and reinforce heteronormativity
To pretending like they had any concrete answers to these questions. Ah, yes the wage gap. It's all Ariel's fault
Anyway, it's a really shallow use of your pop feminism and I vote that we retire it now, please
Part feminism something 0.5 Ariel's voice
What I want from you is your voice
My voice
The bad feminism of that era also had this focus on Ariel's literal voice
Which is just such a hyper literal reading of the movie that it's a wonder the Thermians didn't come up with this
No, not not historical documents. They're not all historical documents. I mean, surely you don't think that Gilligan's Island is a
Those poor people Eric doesn't like her because she's silent if anything
It's despite that see Ariel's voice is the first thing that Eric knows about her
If anything, that is the thing that makes her hot not just to Eric, but to everybody
It's the first thing that is said about her in the movie
She has the most beautiful voice in effect. Eric doesn't know her when he falls in love with her voice
He falls in love with an idea. You can't speak
And you couldn't be who I thought but in the three days that they hang out
He actually gets to know Ariel who he thinks is, you know
Eric that's the first time I've seen you smile in weeks
And eventually he kind of likes her for who she is
Even though she doesn't have the one thing he was so hung up on that hot-ass voice
Ariel is basically a space alien and Eric is cool with that. And honestly, I relate to that Grimsby here kind of nails it
Far better than any dream girl is one of flesh and blood
Eric is in love with an idea
But Ariel is a person in the flesh that he actually kind of has to you know do stuff with anyway
I'm not saying this is like the most textured and nuanced romance in the history of cinema
But to frame it like Ariel is silencing herself to make herself hot is just like it's just bad
Media criticism like that's just not what happens in the movie memes
Please
Part feminism point something something
Ariel's character arc
This was another one that I remember kind of like putting forth that Ariel doesn't grow much in the narrative because she knows what she
Wants at the beginning and then she goes for it and then she gets it and another kind of dishonest framing
Is that she again gives up everything for a guy the moral of my story's changing
When really the guy was just the inciting incident like look at her look at this nerd
Look at her like man cave
Like if she was a dude in the suburb, that would be just like nothing but Simpsons pinball machines
so really her desire for access to the human world is a desire for
Mobility and for knowledge and she wants all of these things way before she lays eyes on Prince Eric
This is a departure from the original Hans Christian Andersen story in this one
The mermaid dies but gets the opportunity to earn an immortal soul through 300 years of indentured servitude
Some feminists have argued that Anderson's version allows the mermaid to self-actualize outside of an attachment to someone else
Which makes the original more feminist actually
Why does everything have to be a competition cheese?
But that's not what happens in the Anderson story instead of being in service to a mortal guy
She enters the service of the ultimate patriarch for 300 years. No less either way
It's not her choice to do this thing and it certainly isn't an empowering tale of autonomy
It is which patriarchy do I subsume myself to in order to get that immortal soul to a god or to a husband?
And I certainly don't think that Hans Christian Andersen was trying to make an empowering tale for young feminists
So yeah, just let Ariel have the guy lady. Let her have her sparkly 80s dress. It's fine
Part 4 true love
So Disney films of the 2000s and the 2010s
They wanted to demonstrate growth within the brand and much of this was characterized by a metatextual criticism of earlier Disney canon
Snow White, Cinderella, Sleeping Beauty and even the Little Mermaid which at the time was barely 20 years old
I know it's not that fairytale book you wanted, but this is better. We got Enchanted
Don't see it's okay, you know, let's just walk we got Tangled
Did Rapunzel and I ever get married but after years and years of asking and asking and asking I finally said yes
We got it in Frozen. You can't marry a man. You just met you can if it's true love
Wow, did we get it in Frozen? I could kiss you
Could I mean I'd like to I may I Ralph breaks the internet. Do you have daddy issues?
Thanks, I hate it so the function of these motifs in these narratives is to feel like criticism
But really it's just reassuring the audience that the fairy tale formula is fine
Actually, the main difference here between metatextual Disney and earlier Disney is that the couple gets married after like a year or two
instead of like a week or two and
You are
Giselle Oh
Giselle
We shall be married in the morning
So even within these newer films, there's this reassurance that the heteronormative fairy tale formula is fine
Actually, and it does jive with your modern feminist cynicism see
Rapunzel and Eugene waited a while to get married
Feminism you mean to tell me you got engaged to someone you just met that day
Frozen hinging so much of its plot on that is part of why I can't really get on the frozen train
If only there was someone out there who loved you
That and whatever terrifying evil genius engineering made it crack for toddlers
Another thing about Disney repeatedly lampshading that we got married too quickly thing is it doesn't actually
Happen in any Disney movie like pick one. Maybe they fall in love fast quote, you know fall in love
But there there's never any definite time with regard to the marriage thing
Tangled Wow, you waited 18 to 24 months
well, we don't know that didn't happen in Cinderella or
Sleeping Beauty or 101 Dalmatians or even a Little Mermaid like we don't know how much time elapsed
between
True love's kiss and marriage so you're not even subverting anything Disney. Come on. So this meta textual
Oh, we took a minute to make sure our feelings are real BS doesn't actually contradict any of the old movies
Yes, even Cinderella and Snow White the thing about true love is it's a narrative utility thing
It doesn't have to be super super literal
Especially in movies with literal magic in it where love is hinted to be this magic power
I will make you a potion that will turn you into a human for three days
Got that three days in the Little Mermaid it functions as a ticking clock three days feels urgent
Okay, chop chop ticking clock. So that's why I'm super sick of this form of Disney meta textual criticism
It feels like growth but it isn't because it doesn't actually contradict anything because if it did
That would be bad
Part something character arcs
So in screenwriting terms a character arc is often defined by a want versus a need
The character has a want which is usually an external motivation
And a need which is like sort of an internal motivation
I
Know me wants to be a Las Vegas showgirl, but she needs to I like nice tits
Always have how about you? I like having nice tits. Okay, maybe that's a bad example
Must be weird not having anybody on you
Okay
Aladdin wants to you know be rich and get the girl
But what he needs to do is like learn to be honest about who he is there is a simple one
But Disney does this all the time?
So in the Little Mermaid Ariel does have a concrete want ie an external motivation
I want to be where the people are but not really a need. She doesn't really need to learn anything
She doesn't really grow during the narrative. She has a goal. She strives for it the end. She gets it
So I guess the question is does the character need to have growth in order for there to be a satisfying arc?
Usually in early Disney movies. They don't with the exception of movies like Pinocchio
Generally, the arc for princesses is wants to get married and does and if there's any character growth
it's probably some like side character like, you know, like grumpy learns who not hate women anymore or
The good fairies. I don't know
I
Can't maybe that's a bad example
But anyway by the 90s a Campbell style hero's journey character arc was pretty dereguer for every Disney protagonist
But Ariel's conflict is almost entirely external which is kind of unusual for Renaissance Disney
Even in the Joseph Campbell rejecting the call to action phase of the character arc, which is exactly what it sounds like
It is an external beat in the form of Sebastian singing under the sea
Are you listen to me the human world? It's a mess Ariel doesn't have any internal conflict about her journey
It has to come from Sebastian, but here's my point about all this. This isn't a bad choice. It's just a choice
There's a storytelling truism being that the protagonist is more compelling if they have some hesitance before embarking on their adventure and Ariel really doesn't
You know, she was just looking for an excuse to get them legs
But would the narrative really have been stronger for it if she had I don't think so
I mean
I guess there could have been a version where
Ariel's the one who refuses the call to action for some reason and then change her mind when Triton's a jerk
But I'm not sure how that would have added anything, but then there's also the screenwriting question of whose story is it?
It's not always the protagonist a popular example of this is from Mad Max Fury Road. Who is the protagonist?
Unambiguously, it's Max. He's the point-of-view character his growth defines the narrative, but whose story is it?
Well, it's Furiosa's story. She is the one who chooses to liberate their wives. It's her actions that spur the plot
She is the one who's pursuing her lost home
She's the one who realizes that her home is now long gone
And she's the one who ultimately learns that maybe the real green place is the friends we made along the way
So the Little Mermaid as a movie is not Ariel's story. It's King Triton's story. Ariel is the point-of-view character
She is the protagonist but the character whose growth actually drives and defines the story is
Triton's. Then I guess there's just one problem left. And what's that your majesty?
How much I'm going to miss her. And the conflict that drives the plot is this power struggle between
Triton and Ursula. Why King Triton?
King Triton begins a story as an overprotective father who doesn't support his daughter's interests or pursuits
He takes it way too far when he finds out she's been hoarding human stuff
immediately regrets it after he goes overboard and Ariel also very justifiably fucks off.
And Ariel being pretty passive in the third act in large part because the twist in the third act is Triton giving up his power
Well, it kind of works because again, it's not Ariel's struggle. It was the power struggle between Ursula and Triton
That was the main conflict where Ursula figured out how to make this horny hot dummy into a pawn in their proxy war
That said I'm not saying it's perfect
I do kind of feel like act three of the Little Mermaid is the weakest link. The elements at play here during
Ursula's gigantism episode are a little random
None of it's really set up except for the idea that there are ships on the bottom of the ocean. There's no Chekhov's
Ursula getting big. There's no Chekhov's ships bow. Eric isn't established as an accomplished helmsman
You know, it's not bad. It's just not as strong as later Musker and Clement movies like Aladdin or Moana
Aladdin has a really solid ending because Aladdin is set up as kind of being a little manipulative jerk
No, I never actually wished to get out of the cave. You did that on your own
It's one of his chief characteristics
He tricks the genie earlier and then he tricks Jafar at the end and the idea of genies as prisoners is well established
You wanted to be a genie? You got it!
So, yeah, I guess what I'm saying is the lack of an internal conflict is not necessarily bad
Especially when there's a compelling external conflict
But I feel like Ariel's passivity is not really indicative of like feminist fails so much as you know
The third act just kind of being kind of random
We need to wrap this movie up
So long, lovey boy
All right, so now it's time to talk about the gay shit
What the fuck?
number six adaptation and the gays
Another thing you always see with critiques of Disney movies with regard to adaptation is you know something something they change the ending or you
Know that you remove the dark shit or whatever. Oh, it doesn't look good. It's hopeless
Absolutely hopeless
Probably the biggest
Adaptational change in the Little Mermaid aside from the ending is the original stories focus on the mermaid not just wanting the prince
But wanting an immortal soul see mermaids like the Danish themselves don't have souls
They just live a long time. But when they die, they turn into seafoam unlike humans who get heaven everlasting
It's a pretty short story
But honestly getting to the end of it is kind of heart-wrenching the mermaid gives up everything for this guy only for him to
Patronizingly go on about how he's her little foundling if he falls in love with her
She gets a soul, but you know
he doesn't he spends the whole story just kind of being really patronizing to her and treating her like a child and
Like wow, if only I could find a wife like you Wow too bad. You can't talk
Dogs are idiots. Think about it Smithers
If I came into your house and started sniffing at your crotch and slobbering all over your face, what would you say?
If you did it sir
but then he marries someone else and
The mermaid sisters go to the sea witch who gives them this dagger and they tell the mermaid if she kills the prince she gets
To turn back into a mermaid
But of course at the last second she just can't do it and the Sun rises and she turns into seafoam
But a bunch of I don't know other magical angel adjacent beings
well, they show up and basically they tell her she can come with them and be put into purgatory and
A sort of indentured servitude to get an immortal soul work for us for 300 years and you get your immortal soul
So bittersweet ending no prince, but she gets her soul on layaway
I guess in a weird way the original story has more of a want versus need character arc the mermaid wants that prince
But she needs the spiritual awakening. She needs that immortal soul
But anyway, the book is gay AF because like
Come on, the mermaid wants this guy and he's like, oh you're such a good friend man
If only I was into you we could totally get married if only I was you know
Into people like you like even just reading this you're like Hans Christian Andersen wrote this about a guy, right?
Maybe Hans Christian Andersen was possibly asexual
But you know definitely a romantic and he had a lot of love letters many of them unsent to this one guy
Who never ended up returning his affections?
so you can tell this is a story about a longing for a person you can't be with and how that person doesn't really want
You and how that causes you pain every time you were near them. So you want this dude you can't have
But at least there's God
Another thing about the queer theory reading of the Little Mermaid is any version of the Little Mermaid is about passing
Andersen's version can be read a few ways the most obvious being the crush he had on this dude that he could never express because
You know, it was a different time
Two bros chillin in the hot tub five feet apart cuz they're not gay
But it also expresses his discomfort for passing in high society
Which he was not born into and this high society was not kind to the nouveau riche like Hans Christian Andersen
This is another reason why the lazy feminist hyper literal
mutilates her body for a man
Criticism bugs me because it totally dismisses any reading of the text that is anything but strictly
Heteronormative and the current discourse the most obvious metaphor is the transgender one
Hell one of the highest profile trans nonprofits in the UK is called mermaids
But there are lots of ways one can change oneself in order to pass in mainstream society
Ariel knows from basically when she's old enough to know stuff that she doesn't really feel at home in the body
She's in both in the Disney movie and in the original story
And so she goes to incredible lengths to change it
So these cheap like Jezebel feminists of 2009 who are like me me me
She gave up her voice and mutilated her body for a man like no like I mean, that's not what happens
But she's got legs you idiot. She traded her vice to the sea witch and got legs
Ariel's whole thing is breaking away from exactly what her society is asking her to do
So I'm not saying that the heteronormative read is completely illegitimate
But for people to treat it like that's the only read is lazy and basic and I'm just kind of tired of it
So anyway, so the OG short story is gay AF moving on part something
The Disney version is gay if to just you know, not in the same way
They weren't kidding when they called me. Well a witch in the early days of queer theory. This was like, hmm
Why are all the villains queer coded? Oh, I shall practice my curtsy
But now we've more or less come around to the correct opinion which is yes, yes they are
They are extremely queer coded and also they are awesome and we stan
You know, my last captain of the guard was a bit of a disappointment to me
Ursula is more than queer coded
It is well known that her design was heavily inspired by the drag queen divine who was most famous for starring in John Waters films
like hairspray I
Watch that tramp and I'm embarrassed to be white and pink fling goes this blood turn you on
It doesn't more than turn me on. Mr. Vader. It makes me come and female troubles
I hate you
Voice actress Pat Carroll conceived Ursula as like an aging Shakespearean actress which explains so much of the performance
Look at me
Wasted away to practically nothing
My poor little poopsies and don't underestimate the importance of a body language
Thirsty bitch
I'm taking this one. Give me the shoe bitch
And she ends up as sort of a composite of drag and camp icons Joan Collins
No, you know where to find the boys and the booze
Tallulah Bankhead my good woman. Would you kindly leave the premises before I grab your pink hair and put it out by black roots
Three days Norman Desmond. All right, mr. DeMille. I'm ready for my close-up and of course divine
You're a pain too
Like in a lot of ways this goes beyond coding this is clearly deliberate
Especially considering how much poor unfortunate souls resembles a traditional drag show
But you'll find that nowadays I've mended all my ways
She uses her eels as a boa
This is also the first Disney movie to use Alan Menken and Howard Ashman
Who were at the time best known for the Broadway camp hit Little Shop of Horrors quick note on Howard Ashman
It's not a coincidence that the most iconic songs of the Disney Renaissance came out of those first three movies
but then kind of
out after that
And that's not nostalgia that's Howard Ashman who died from complications from AIDS in 1991 and while it's not like making never wrote any
Good music again. I feel like he was at his strongest writing with Ashman
Ashman was deathly ill during the production of Beauty and the Beast and if you really want some heartstrings tug
Listen to the people who worked with him described the way he kept on trucking until the very end
Howard was physically there. He had lost a lot of weight. He was, you know, he was wearing his shirt with suspenders, you know
And trying to be as casual as possible and certainly didn't want to project any sense of of illness
um at that point
Nobody else professionally knew that he was he was sick
Another thing that tends to get lost in analysis of this movie Menken and Ashman had a huge influence not just on the music
But also the story itself. Not only did they help shape the story
They had the songs and score written before animation even began
And in that way also helped shape the characters particularly Ursula who is defined by her big musical number
The boss is on a roll
Oh
That's Menken and Ashman Ursula's drag show basically explaining gender performativity theory by way of Judith Butler
But far more entertaining you'll have your looks
your pretty face
body language
Menken and Ashman so the read of poor unfortunate souls his drag performance was deliberate Menken and Ashman
Especially would have been steeped in New York drag culture. So I don't read this as Disney being appropriative to me
This is Ashman writing what he knows
So in my old age Ursula is far and away my favorite thing in this movie
Possibly because i'm only about three years away from morphing into her completely
But I love Ursula the older I get as a brand Disney villains have always been my favorite
And of course most recent Disney movies don't do villains in the traditional sense anymore
Like they'll do the bait and switch or the misunderstood or sympathetic motivations or whatever this is
But after Shadow Man and Mother Gothel, they kind of petered off on pure fun evil. Come on boys
Won't you shake a poor sinner's hand?
And I don't know what it is about evil without nuance that I find so appealing in the case of Disney villains
But I think it's really just the fact that they're having fun
That everyone in a Disney movie is having fun including the bad guy this is why of classic Disney
I think Maleficent is the most beloved she out of all of them is having a high old time
People don't remember the dalmatians. They remember Cruella. Look at how much fun she's having
This is part of why of the renaissance Disney movies the most beloved ones tend to have the most memorable villains
Why do we even have that level
And that's part of why the black cauldron is widely considered the worst one. I'm, sorry guys
I know you love John Hurt, but he sucks in this. Oh my soldiers
How long I have thirsted to be a god
In fact the black cauldron nearly ended the animation studio until the great mouse detective the best Sherlock Holmes movie of all time
Don't at me quite literally saved the studio. Smile everyone
Disney now owns the world. Thank you the great mouse detective
I have the power
Of course you do I feel like it's not one of those situations like the Hunchback of Notre Dame where
we all kind of reevaluate whether it got a fair shake upon its first release because
I'm losing to a bird. Everybody likes the little mermaid and you know, it's not bad. It's not the best one
It's fine
But you know there was that backlash that was kind of lazy and targeting the popular thing because that was what the click bait was
for a while
But thank god we've moved on and now our click bait is like
I don't know
UFOs
Wow, what a good segue
Hi, i'm alan smithy the director of this film. Are you tired of science fiction books with lyrical poetic prose?
Do you like weird space aliens? Are you a fan of the comical misuse of everyday household?
I I guess I didn't really do that today. That was a missed opportunity. I should have done that but you didn't
Well, you should pre-order my book truth of the divine it is the second book meaning it's the
sequel to the first book which is
Axioms end. Oh boy. See this is what y'all tuned in for. This is um, the requisite self promo portion
I'm gonna do better this time
Because it is a better book. It's got everything the cheesecake factory
president dick cheney
congressional hearings
persians
Sadness and the reason I promote these now is that pre-orders are extremely helpful not just for me
But for any author you want to uh help so if you have a favorite author you want to support and they have a book
That's coming out pre-order their book and then like six months from now
You'll get like a magic package in the mail and then you'll be like, oh
Right
I guess I did order that and the best thing about pre-orders is you do not get charged until the book ships
So if I get canceled again, you can just cancel your order
So another question I get a lot will there be signed copies
Yes, do I know how that's gonna work? No
They haven't told me yet. I'll put that in the next video. But if it's anything like last time
It's uh putting your receipt for the thing you already bought into like a online portal. I don't know. I'll let you know later
It's it's gonna be great. So the pre-order link for truth of the divine is in the description
Unless you are in the uk
in which case
Pre-order the book through your favorite uk-based online retailer because the uk edition has a different publisher
And that has caused some confusion. This this also applies to australia new zealand, but not canada
And for those of you in the rest of the world, um, I don't know use a vpn
I have no control over how to ship to what country or foreign language rights so far
the only country that has bought foreign language rights is
turkey
No, i'm not kidding. I know brazilians. I know
Consider petitioning your publishers. Also, I will come to brazil. I promise we were gonna go in 2020
but there was
You know, there was a thing
Hand to your very very large christ we were gonna come in 2020. We'll come eventually
so anyway pre-order truth of the divine about which the new york times has said nothing because
Uh, they haven't gotten a review copy yet, but in the meantime, thank you for watching and I hope you spend the rest of your
pride month stanning
ursula
Don't be scared. It's only me
And you can all come everyone can come every creature in the sea can come
Hi father, sorry i'm late
Well, i'm not leaving you up there alone this time you mean you'll go with me
It doesn't look like I have a choice
Oh, it'll be so much fun. You'll see come on. Let's go
Hardly, wait. I'm not a fish. I'm a dolphin. That's not very nice to say
I'm your official royal pet. Don't you like me? Did you hear that? Cecil the prince is gonna marry her
Well, I hope so claudia
I hope so
Stop the storm stop the storm away sky creatures
Oh, you mean they're getting married
