Oh, I'm definitely not going to get this video finished on time.
Happy holidays, friends, enemies, frenemies and splenemies.
Paris Bomberguy here, and I'll see you in the next video.
Okay, right, I can explain.
I recorded the Halloween segment of that video
as a funny joke about how it takes me a while
to make videos, and then I actually missed last Christmas.
So here we are in the apocalypse.
Let's all watch last year's Christmas video.
This year, now that it's done,
this means I technically got a seasonal video out on time,
which means I'm good at my job.
Fuck you.
I'm just chilling out here in my house,
enjoying the best that the clearance aisle had to offer.
This Fortnite Funko Pop Tower Recon Specialist.
Okay, this tasteful Coraline mug
you can drink out of Coraline's head.
Start off your morning routine with Coraline.
Uh, not dishwasher or microwave safe.
And this friend's makeup set where every color
is a reference to a show that ended 15 years ago.
Fukuyama was right.
History ended in 2004 when Rachel got off the plane.
And yes, I'm actually going to give this as a gift
at my family's secret Santa this year.
I guess you know who got you your gift, Luke.
I hope you've seen friends.
I also hope you'll stop being such a Ross.
Ah, but the sad thing is,
when I give my family these gifts,
which are as good as they deserve, on Christmas Day,
I won't even be allowed to say Merry Christmas as I do it
because of the liberal, communist, atheist conspiracy
to destroy the Christian religion by eroding its traditions.
Political correctness, whoever that is,
literally says it's racist to say Christmas now.
At least that's what I reckon is happening.
And that's the same thing as checking.
Our culture is being crushed underfoot
by radicals who want to destroy polite society
to achieve their own ends.
Oh, those hecking, gosh darned, flipping bastards.
Christianity comes under attack.
There's a war on Christmas.
They outlawed Merry Christmas a few years ago,
and you know it.
Christmas becomes ever more about shallow displays
of political correctness.
Happy holidays, not Merry Christmas.
Kids no longer have Christmas vacation, holiday vacation.
Christmas parties, holiday parties.
The war on Christmas.
Whoever's watching this right now,
think of something you love
that brings you a sense of peace and decency,
and they will somehow link it to the patriarchy
and the rest of their politically correct nonsense.
Christianity is being bigoted against.
We're under attack.
You couldn't even say Merry Christmas at Walmart.
Obama said Merry Christmas a few times,
but he still made sure to neuter the Christmas cards
and also the Christmas decorations at the White House.
What we're seeing happening has been a recent phenomenon,
the war on Christmas, the war against religious liberty.
Of course it's a war on Christmas.
Christmas has lost all meaning thanks to cultural Marxism.
Ah, it's those bloody cultural Marxists
ruining everything again.
That's why society's getting worse.
It can't possibly be because of the policies
of the people who keep getting elected.
But don't worry, peace-loving citizens.
I'm here to lead the charge in fighting back
against these imaginary ghosts,
so grab a slice of anonymous holiday meat
and settle into your festive-season Anderson shelter
before the political correctness bombs hit
because it's time for the war on Christmas.
Ooh, I won.
Ho, ho, ho!
Merry Chri-
Whoa!
In most Western countries,
the winter season plays host to many religious
and cultural traditions.
Some people say the phrase,
happy holidays, exists as a way of trying
to be more inclusive to other people's traditions
in the modern era, but this is inaccurate.
I did literally five minutes of Googling
and found happy holidays being used as far back as 1863,
and who knows how far back further
it would have turned out to have gone
if I'd done any more research.
It turns out that people like to have
more than one phrase to say.
It's why people put season's greetings on stuff.
This isn't blasphemy. It's language.
Did you know we've been writing X-mas
instead of Christmas for thousands of years?
The X isn't trying to secularize the religion
by removing the word Christ or something.
It's actually the Greek letter chi,
which has been a Christogram,
an abbreviation of Jesus Christ,
for about 1,700 years or something.
I don't know. I'm not a religion...studier.
An extremely popular song from 19-
Theologian. That was the word.
A very popular song from as far back as 1942
was Happy Holiday.
You might know this song or at least one
of its 65 million covers.
It was originally sung by Bing Crosby
who was, by all accounts, a pretty devoted Catholic.
Bing was one of the faces of Christmas for decades.
His Christmas radio broadcasts were hugely popular.
That song was the opening and closing theme
of his Christmas Sing with Bing program
which aired every Christmas Eve for almost 10 years.
So sure, happy holidays is a useful catch-all term
since there are a lot of holidays going on.
Makes sense to use it in some contexts,
but saying it isn't actually a new phenomenon.
It's been a normal thing for Christians
to say to each other for many years,
and that piece of knowledge is one of the finest gifts
I can bring.
Pa-rum-pa-pum-pum.
Peace on Earth!
These are all indisputable and quite interesting
historical facts,
but not everyone puts the truth on their Christmas list.
Some people want to open their stockings
and find an explanation for why they're angry all the time.
The big originator of the War on Christmas theory
is Bill O'Reilly.
I couldn't find footage of Bill's original
War on Christmas segment,
but handily, the script Bill reads from
in these segments was posted as an article
on Fox's website.
The segment was titled Christmas Under Siege
in which he made exaggerated claims
about how various holiday parades
were doing away with Christmas floats,
New York has a holiday tree instead of a Christmas tree,
and how Macy's stopped greeting people
with Merry Christmas.
They said a different thing!
O'Reilly then went on to fantasize
that this was part of a plot
to diminish people's faith in religion,
saying that, quote-unquote,
secular progressives wanted to destroy
religious oppositions to their policies
such as gay marriage, abortion, and drug legalization,
and to bring about this horrible nightmare future,
it was important to destroy religion in the public arena.
Thus, Christian displays like Christmas must be scaled back
because the connection with Judeo-Christian beliefs
is bad for the secular agenda.
Ah, yes, the famously Judeo-Christian belief
in Christmas.
The secular movement has influence in the media,
among some judges and politicians.
Americans will lose their country
if they don't begin to take action.
Any assault on Judeo-Christian philosophy
should be fought.
Organizations like thomasmoore.org
and the Alliance Defense Fund in Phoenix
are fighting back but need your help.
The USA cannot defeat terrorism
and any other evil without a strong,
traditional foundation that clearly defines
right from wrong.
The struggle today is not about Christmas
but about the spirit of our country.
Ahem.
Bill is writing about how Macy's say a different thing now.
It's basically the conservative version of slam poetry.
Take something that technically has happened
and then contort it until it's an attack
on the very soul of our society
and we need to defend ourselves,
and that's why we need your attention
and the money we'll get from our sponsors
for getting eyes on their peppermint-flavored Play-Doh
or ribbed-for-her-pleasure coffee machines.
Bill's early rhetoric forms the basis
for all the madness to come.
It's always stores not saying Christmas as much,
stuff like that.
Holiday wish list?
Oh, no.
God is dead and we have killed him.
The other side outnumbers them.
I mean, Christian, Judeo, Christian,
people who believe in that philosophy
outnumber the secularists,
maybe six to seven to one.
Oh, my religion has more subscribers than yours.
By the end of his tenure, Bill was straight up
just saying the names of companies
which were trying to slit the throat of Christmas.
Barnes & Noble, Best Buy, Foot Locker,
The Gap, The Limited, Nordstrom,
shopping on Amazon.
This year's list was handily provided to Bill
by the American Family Association.
The AFA website is a series of articles
about how only the left does violence
because they've never heard of mass shooting statistics,
LGBT people are the real bullies because, uh,
a woman refused to accept her children were trans
and they stopped wanting to talk to her,
Hallmark and Chick-fil-A are the devil now
because they showed a lesbian wedding
in a commercial or something,
and how VeggieTales is back.
Oh, and also tons of war on Christmas bullshit
verbatim stealing Bill's old schtick.
Three guys you've never heard of discuss the secular push
to scrub away the root word of Christ in Christmas.
There was a war on Christmas we were noticing.
Some people may say,
well, that's not really a big deal, is it?
Well, we thought it was part of the secularist push
to scrub all references to Christianity from our culture.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, we've heard all this before.
The secularists want to destroy Christianity
and they're doing it by rewording a few things at Christmas
but the AFA, unlike Fox, don't have advertisers.
They survive through donations
and selling things on their website
and you bet they've got a way of capitalizing
on the war on Christmas.
They want you to buy a button that reminds people
that Jesus Christ exists.
Well, it is the Christmas season
and we've got these buttons that we are offering.
Honestly, how can people know
you're a real member of the Jesus fan club
if you aren't repping his holy merch?
You can get your 10-pack of these buttons for $15
and just go to afa.net.
Is it AFA store?
AFA?
Either one.
Afastore.net, afastore.net.
Which brings us to the AFA's yearly naughty or nice list.
One of the most deludedly self-righteous lists
I've ever read and I've read my top 10 games
of the decade list.
Both versions of Dark Souls II are on there out of spite.
Fuck you.
We are not friends.
Click on any naughty company name
for details and contact information.
They want you to send emails to some guy
who works at Office Depot to try to get them
to write Christmas on things more.
If a company has items associated with Christmas
but did not use the word Christmas,
then the company is considered as censoring Christmas.
That's the rubric.
If you sell me a cracker at Christmas
but you don't call it a Christmas cracker,
you're a secularist terrorist
who's trying to stab the Christmas family.
For many years, Bill, with the help of the AFA,
was the reigning champion of the fight to save Christmas.
He was the only man standing up to defend Christian values,
which are the reason he knows right from wrong so well.
But then in 2017, he got fired
for allegedly sexually harassing
at least six of his female co-workers.
So Bill wasn't exactly a great follower
of his religious teachings, was he?
It's very clear why the war on Christmas argument
is so attention-grabbing.
It's telling people that their religion is under attack
and we need those traditional values
or our country will fall to terrorism or other evil.
People will pay attention to your show
when you say things like that,
which leads to increased viewership
and higher value of your advertising spots.
You might even get people to buy a button
or get some wealthy cretins
to donate comical amounts of money to you.
However, I don't think this alone
gets to the true core of why this belief survives
so well in the minds of more extreme conservatives,
so we're gonna have to go deeper,
and then it says in brackets,
Inception Horn Noise.
Oh, I wasn't supposed to read that.
Maybe to understand this line of thinking further,
we need to go in search of even more ridiculously false
and silly versions and see how it functions there.
First, I want to start off with a central theme
which is the war on Christmas.
Oh, hi, Paul.
In this classic video from 2017,
which is a yearly rewatch for me,
it's just a hilarious shambles in so many ways,
Paul Joseph Watson spends 15 minutes
of what's left of his life,
and you only get one life.
This is it, complaining that there's a Tesco commercial
with too much diversity in it.
They called it a Christmas ad,
or at least it was supposed to be that.
Didn't have any symbols of Christianity
in the ad whatsoever.
It did have a gay couple, hijabi Muslims,
all this other goth.
No actual Christian symbol
because, of course, we can't have that anymore, can we?
At least, like, put a vicar in it or something.
A cross. Anything Christian.
It's a Christmas ad for God's sake.
All right, fine, Paul. I'll see what I can do.
Ah, approved for broadcast in InfoWars land.
Wait, Paul also stipulated that a religious figure
would suffice. Okay, how about this?
Hey, guys, that was the College of Cardinals on the phone.
I've just been elected pope.
There, is that religious enough for you?
And if that's not good enough,
I bet I can undo some more catechisms.
Ah, but hang on a second.
It's easy to make fun of Paul.
He's made sure of that,
but let's seriously look at the idea
there is some kind of manipulation happening
with the lack of Christian iconography
in this commercial because this begs a deeper question
which is should Christmas commercials
prominently display Christian stuff
like crosses and priests
because I haven't seen a convincing argument
that the answer to that question is yes
because even in commercials long before
the supposed war on Christmas,
you can still see a seemingly deliberate choice
not to explicitly invoke Christianity
even when the intended audience would be mostly Christian
because it turns out Christians have been having
this exact discussion for a long time now
even before anyone knew what political correctness was.
Historically, plenty of Christians have found
that their religion being tied to a product
being sold to them is kind of crass and disgusting.
There's a Fox & Friends segment from a few years ago
that highlights this discrepancy in an amazing way.
They had a real Catholic priest on
to discuss the war on Christmas
but despite how hard they tried to push him,
he wasn't annoyed that things weren't Christian enough.
You'd be fine if it said Merry Christmas
but it doesn't. It says Happy Holidays
or things are simply red or green.
Well, it's not so much that that bothers me.
It's more that the consumerism
and the pressure to just shop, shop, shop.
He was much more concerned with how consumerism
had eroded the religious meaning of the holiday.
It's more the consumerism I think that's a problem for me.
All right, so let's take a look at some of the stores
that have taken Christmas out of their mottos.
J.Crew.
You can see the Fox people had really planned
for a very different kind of interview.
They'd prepared a graphic all about the mottos
that didn't say Christmas anymore
but not everyone is interested in fabricating
a culture war for attention.
Some people actually want to think about things.
I guess it bothers me that they're using, uh,
sort of, uh, overtly Christian, uh, tropes and themes
like Believe and Merry and things like that
that are associated with Christmas
but they're using it to just market goods.
Now, I don't think it's intentional.
I think it's just a way to appeal
to as many people as possible
but it really kind of denudes, uh,
the holiday of, uh, any sort of religious import.
And it seems that for many devout Christians
the concern isn't that commercials
aren't Christian enough.
It's the exact opposite,
that commercials are leaning a bit too heavily
on Christian ideas and themes in order to sell products.
But the Catholic Church is notoriously full
of commie scumbags.
It just hasn't been the same since the Byzantine Papacy.
You don't have to get it. Don't worry.
Sometimes you write jokes just for you.
Now, I'm not a fancy big time Christian boy
but maybe commercializing the religious aspect
of Christmas in order to sell people things is bad
and the more generic holiday themes in stores
and commercials is a good way of respecting
Christians' religious traditions
and it's been that way since long before 2017.
Paul's whole narrative here is based on the assumption
that commercials loved to invoke Christianity
until Twitter invented social justice
but as we've seen, this assumption is objectively false
and inventing an imaginary past that's been stolen
to justify present foolishness is a real Rachel move.
Regina Phalange.
Facts and data are inconvenient for Paul
so he doesn't like to bring them up
but I saw something interesting that I thought was relevant
so I'm gonna talk about it while I have the chance.
There's a great paper by the National Center
for Social Research which has been gathering data
about how people approach their religion
for about 35 years now
and what they discovered is quite interesting.
In the last 30 years, less and less people identify
as Christian, at least according to the most accurate data.
This corresponds with an increase in people
identifying specifically as unreligious or atheist.
Since the 2010s, there's been decisively more
non-religious people in Britain than Christians even.
Most of these people probably still celebrate
Christian traditions.
They're a common part of English culture.
I'm an atheist and I still celebrate Christmas
but all these folks probably aren't putting crosses
anywhere in their houses and really,
who's to say that that's what Christians do?
Not everyone thinks that celebrating their faith
requires putting a cross in their house.
People's relationships with their religion
aren't that simple.
There's no Christmas handbook
mandating you hang a cross up for the Yuletide.
In fact, the actual Christian handbook
seems to prioritize worshiping in private
unlike those darn pagans who love to babble on and on.
What a weird thing to specify.
I guess what I'm trying to say is for most people,
this commercial is an accurate representation
of how people behave at Christmas.
It's just not about throwing crosses around, you know?
But while we're on the topic of representation,
I can't help but notice the specific lack
of lightsabers or delicious space milk
anywhere in this commercial
even though according to census data,
almost 1% of Britons self-identify as Jedi.
Probably not after this Christmas though.
No! Stop it! No!
Paul's rant kind of goes on for a while.
He doesn't really have a point he's getting to
so much as he's mad a commercial has Muslims in it
for a few seconds.
He's mad it's a Twitter moment
and some people are applauding the diversity.
He's sure that a YouTube video being brigaded
by his followers and getting a couple of thousand dislikes
indicates actually it's very unpopular and so on.
You can even see in his face that he's struggling
to really articulate a decent justification to be angry.
Of course, there was a backlash to the backlash
which basically peaked yesterday with Twitter.
Twitter came out and said this was one of their
featured stories in their Twitter moments
which of course is on the homepage
when anybody goes onto Twitter.
Ha ha ha! Imagine this being your life.
It's stuff like this that really gives context
to tweets where he's mad at black celebrities
talking about racism,
calling them sanctimonious crybabies.
Saying Britain still has racism is annoying.
What's way more important and pressing
is the Tesco Christmas commercial.
He's also very sure this stuff
isn't Bill O'Reilly nonsense anymore.
It used to be, but it's real now.
It's no longer some Bill O'Reilly meme
when it's actually happening.
He keeps saying this over and over.
It's like boomer dubstep.
Now, I remember 10, 15 years ago,
this is something that Bill O'Reilly,
these other neocons would constantly bring up.
People would debunk it and say it's a false concern.
It's being exaggerated.
There's no war on Christmas.
What are you talking about? This is crazy.
Well, fast forward to 2017.
Everything Bill O'Reilly said, yeah, that was crazy,
but fast forward to the Tesco Christmas commercial.
The thing about Info Wars videos
which are recorded live on the actual show,
the ones where Alex is also there
and Paul's just calling in,
is that Paul is fundamentally not a very good live speaker.
I'm not saying this because I disagree
with his political views or to make fun of him.
He's a poor public speaker.
It's just not one of his skills, and that's fine.
Some people are just too self-conscious for it.
That's why he writes his videos in advance
and edits them with snappy cuts and always is yelling.
It makes his work hold people's attention,
but he just can't maintain that energy in a live setting.
Worse, his clear anxieties about what he's doing
start to come through when the spotlight's on him too long.
Sometimes he workshops his tweets in the pub
with his friends before he posts them.
No, I'm serious.
He shows the tweet on his phone to his friends and asks,
is this okay? Should I post it?
Looking for some kind of approval
with an anxious look on his face.
And it's a tweet petulantly quoting Stormzy out of context
in order to imply that he hates all white people,
and his remaining real-life friends nod and go,
yeah, sure, man.
I don't get why it's a big deal to you,
but I guess it's for your job, right?
And then one of them sends me a message about it later.
But anyway, my point is Paul isn't that great
at this whole live entertainment thing,
and there's a reason Alex Jones uses him
as sporadically as he can on his shows.
He's only got about five things to say,
and he has to keep saying them over and over.
So eventually Alex realizes he needs to jump in
and starts interrupting him with points of his own.
It's a Christmas ad for God's sake,
but here's the kicker.
It's like having a Christmas ad
where you drag Santa Claus behind a car.
Yeah, there'd be newspaper articles about it all week.
Well, Paul, this is cultural appropriation.
This is what the left's all about, is overriding,
taking control of everything, dominating culture.
All the headlines are like,
oh, you're so offended at seeing Muslims.
It's like, no, I'm offended at the fact,
or I'm perplexed at the fact there's no...
It'd be like if you had an ad saying,
this holiday season, support Ramadan
at your local halal stores,
and then it showed guys in Knights Templar uniforms
at the Muslim store.
The Muslim store.
The other big claim he's making in this war on Christmas bit
also has to do with Tesco.
Paul went to a Tesco's and noticed, to his horror,
that not enough things said Christmas,
so he whipped out his phone and took some pictures
to complain about on Twitter later.
There's a funny bit in this video
where Alex says he should have documented it,
not realizing Paul already had.
They've got these Christmas cards, Alex.
They call them, they've renamed them.
They're now called charity cards.
Paul, you gotta go back in and get some footage of this.
Well, I've got the pictures and I tweeted them,
but people said...
Just incredibly poor communication
going on at InfoWars.
The tweets themselves are really something.
Was in Tesco earlier.
Their entire...
I can't do his voice.
Their entire Christmas shelf,
cards, wrapping paper, confectionery,
not a single mention of the word Christmas.
Not a single one.
Christmas cards are now called charity cards.
Pathetic.
Truly pathetic.
Then he atted Tesco.
Yeah, this is Tesco speaking.
I'm sorry, Paul.
We'll put Christmas on the crack.
And before all you pointy heads claim
they're called charity cards
because some proceeds go to charity,
that's always been the case,
but they were still called Christmas cards.
It's not just the commercial.
At Tesco has capitulated to politically correct douchebaggery.
And then there's a picture of some crackers
and they're just called crackers.
You know, because that's their name.
They're not even calling them Christmas crackers anymore.
The war on Christmas used to be some far right,
evangelical, Bill O'Reilly.
Jesus Christ, Paul, we get it.
You don't have to say it that many times.
Truly saddening.
After all these years,
Tesco have finally started the war on Christmas for real.
There's no Christmas anywhere in Tesco anymore.
Not a single one.
However, eagle-eyed viewers,
well, frankly, eyed viewers
who take a look at the photograph
for more than a nanosecond
might start to notice things Paul somehow didn't notice
when he was literally standing there looking at them.
For example, if you zoom in on one of his own pictures,
you can actually see Merry Christmas
written on some of the crackers.
Some people went into their local Tesco
and found that Christmas was written everywhere.
Some people pointed out that these charity cards
were in a display marked Christmas cards
and still others looked at packs of these charity cards
and found that some of them say Merry Christmas on them.
Tesco also has Christmas all over its website
where it happens to refer to the charity cards
as charity Christmas cards.
The website also refers to crackers as Christmas crackers.
Not a single one.
These things were mentioned to Paul immediately
in response to the tweets when he made them a few years ago
and good fun was had by all laughing
at this sad middle-aged man
taking pictures in Tesco to whine about.
By far the funniest bit of this video
is when they cut to a feed of Paul's tweet thread
about the Tesco stuff and when they're scrolling down,
they accidentally scroll to the tweet
pointing out Christmas is literally on the packaging
and then whoever's doing the screen capture panics,
zooms out, and scrolls down one more
and it's the one pointing out Christmas is on the website
and they just have to awkwardly fade back to Paul
saying it's not all made up.
This is definitely real.
Now, I mean, this is not some kind of Bill O'Reilly meme
from the early 2000s anymore.
This is actually happening.
No, I get it, Paul. It's not just Bill O'Reilly anymore.
You made that point already. Move on.
This is a deliberate Orwellian process
of eliminating words, changing language
for the purposes of some lame nod at political correctness.
Okay, some of you might be confused at this point
so let's just get this straight.
The far left who, as we all know, run Tesco
are trying to undermine culture
because they're worried about sounding racist
so they're doing this by not letting stores
put Christmas anywhere except in the stores,
the products in the stores, and on the website.
There, sorted. See?
It's the Marxists at it again.
I went into Tesco on Saturday,
went to the Christmas section of the store.
Not one mention of Christmas.
They don't even mention the word Christmas.
Paul, of course they did.
That's how you know it's the Christmas section!
That's why every year I know exactly where the elves are.
You can't hide from me.
Now, there is one minor thing worth talking about here.
One teensy, tiny thing that Paul might not have thought about
which is that one of the reasons why Christmas
isn't written on everything is because you already know
it's for Christmas.
All the Christmas stuff is only in stores
in the Christmas season for you to buy for Christmas.
They're neatly arranged in special red aisles
so you know where to look for the Christmas stuff.
Putting Christmas on every single thing is just pointless.
This isn't even to do with political correctness.
It's just basic store design.
They don't feel the need to acknowledge Christmas
on the label because Christmas is being acknowledged
at every other point in this transaction.
Oh, no, the label of this wrapping paper
doesn't say Christmas wrapping paper.
Help, I'm being tricked into forgetting my religion exists.
Oh, Christmas is written all over the fucking wrapping paper?
Oh, well, I guess I'll celebrate Christmas again this year.
God, the cultural Marxists had better get their act together
if they're gonna win this war.
Ugh, ah, fuck, ugh.
Pfft, pfft, pfft, pfft.
There, that's probably structurally stable, right?
Now, one might say, ah, it's not fair
to go after an old InfoWars video.
What if InfoWars have spontaneously become smart
and rational now and cleverly moved on
from a topic that they got obliterated on
when people looked at their own photos?
Well, yeah, they did.
They dropped the topic and decided to move on
to doing real journalism.
I'm kidding, they did another one this year.
Alex Jones goes to the Texas state capital
to witness the city of Austin's Christmas tree
and expose the anti-Christian agenda
hidden in plain sight.
The banner beneath the tree that reads,
Happy Holidays.
Merry Christmas, ladies and gentlemen.
Merry Christmas.
And it's about Jesus Christ.
It's not about the big corporations
and the chi-com atheists and the globalists.
I think the existence of videos like this
really crystallizes what the war on Christmas
is actually about.
Bullshit artists like InfoWars
have to play a very careful game
to survive and make money.
InfoWars can't make money as a news website
because they don't actually do any journalism
so no one comes to them for that
and they can't easily sell advertisements
on their website or videos
because for unknown reasons,
barely anyone wants to be associated with them.
It starts out with, don't use the N-word.
Well, I don't use that, so okay.
And the next it's, oh, don't say Merry Christmas.
Say Happy Holidays.
Yeah, those are the same thing.
Eh, I never thought of it that way.
Imagine a shoe company looking for somewhere to advertise
and seeing one of these videos
and it's Alex Jones going,
remember when they tricked us
into not saying the N-word anymore?
Well, Happy Holidays is just like that.
They're probably gonna say no
but Alex Jones has this problem
which is that he really, really likes expensive watches.
He loves to wear Rolexes on his show
and according to court records,
he once bought four of them in a single day.
The cheapest one I could find him wearing
cost around $12,000.
So obviously he needs a lot of money to live
and how's he gonna do that?
Why, he'd have to develop some kind of business model
that revolves around exploiting gullible people.
So their best bet is to target a very specific demographic.
In this case, conservatives with a conspiratorial streak
validate them by telling them that they're right
and then going, hey,
if you want to become even more powerful,
check out our pills.
Also get all you need to completely stuff
Christmas stockings this year
with our Christmas Mega Pack.
So it starts with, don't say Merry Christmas,
and it ends with,
they create an orthodox centralized system as well
that is gonna be welded in to the new fascist left west
and out of that marriage,
you will have the communist socialist system
of Islam merged with that.
I mean, this sentence doesn't make sense.
It just doesn't.
It's a list of keywords
but just making fun of how dumb this all is
would be to ignore why he still does it and why it works.
On topics like this, I find myself constantly coming back
to a great paper by Cormac Hurley,
a principal researcher at Microsoft,
about Nigerian email scams and how they function.
You know how the Nigerian email scams
usually have very poor language usage and grammar
and even say they're from Nigeria
even though if you Google Nigeria,
one of the first results is email scam
and that makes them an obvious scam to most people?
This is actually part of how the scam works
because their targets are the sort of people
who won't notice the writing problems
because they tend to be the sort of people
who end up giving them money.
If you're smart enough to not fall for that part,
they don't want you wasting their time
and they've quite smartly selected you out of the process
by writing poorly.
Since gullibility is unobservable,
the best strategy is to get those
who possess this quality to self-identify.
Infowars is following a similar business practice.
Alex Jones's objective is to make money
to sustain his expensive lifestyle
where he eats watches or something
and to do that, he needs to target an audience
who will be fooled into buying his overpriced stuff.
So by talking absolute nonsense,
yes, Jones is turning away everyone with half a brain,
but people with half a brain generally are quite hard
to sell the world's most expensive protein bars,
ultimate fish oil, and, uh, Ultra 12.
Jones is deliberately laser targeting
the kind of people who would hear a phrase like
the communist socialist system of Islam
and think, wow, that's bad.
That's really bad. That's three bad things I hate.
How do I stop that thing that must be happening
because the man with the nice watch said it was?
Which leaves them open to being sold the idea
that keeping Infowars afloat by buying their stuff
is basically the same as showing you're a hero
fighting back against these very real problems
and for the people who fall for it,
it is a real ego boost which creates a loyal fan base
full of repeat customers.
Nobody finds these videos convincing,
but the people therefore find them reassuring.
What you call weird conspiracy theorists
who need validation,
some people call a marketable demographic,
but to keep this machine going,
Jones has to find increasingly outlandish things to say
to hold these people's attention
and come up with reasons to keep supporting him
and fighting the Infowar,
and that means getting more and more ridiculous
as the infinite eternal threat
only gets even more infinitely threatening.
Not only does this dance get increasingly difficult,
they've also discovered that you can't just say lies
about people, it turns out.
If they say ridiculous bullshit about real people,
they risk being sued for libel or defamation
as is the case with the Sandy Hook parents
who are in the process of fucking destroying
Jones in court for telling his sizable audience
that the parents of murdered children
are all just paid actors and it was a fake shooting,
so the war on Christmas is a real boon for Jones
because he can just go hog wild
about whatever comes into his head,
just make up whatever,
and occasionally cut to footage
of a tree being pushed over
or some random act of vandalism
and explain how they're all connected
by a web of destruction
by the secret Muslim communist anti-family coalition
and it's so incomprehensible
it can't even be considered defamation of anyone.
This is the kind of nonsense safe zone
Infowars has to live in to avoid destroying itself
by getting owned in court which is why,
for legal reasons,
I'm required to mention that story I told earlier
about Paul Joseph Watson is not true.
I made it up. Those DMs are fake.
I thought it would be a funny joke to show how shitty it is
to make things up about people.
However, even though I made it up,
it definitely did happen.
The war on Christmas is a safe bet for Jones to cover
since there's no obvious tangible negative effect
on real people except his audience
whose minds he is completely ruining
but that's their choice.
As what some French people might call
a connoisseur of Infowars garbage,
so I guess it's me whose life they're ruining,
this is my favorite kind of the schlock they do
where Alex just grabs a cameraman
and goes out in public and just makes a bunch of noise
and runs around annoying people
and getting to arguments with whoever he can get
his soy-stained hands on.
Sometimes he forgets that trying to cite data
opens him up to being punked
and accidentally offers statistics
that can be easily rebuked with simple explanations
and then they have to leave it in
because that's the best footage they got that night.
There is a war on Christmas.
There is a war on Christianity.
Did you know that more than half
of all religious persecution in the world
is against Christians?
I believe it. I mean, we're one of the largest groups.
Oh. So statistically,
if there's attack on a region,
there's gonna be a lot of attack on Christians.
Uh...
♪ Somebody wants to kill... ♪
Once that kid politely shakes his hand and leaves,
Jones starts losing it,
just screaming Merry Christmas into the void,
talking about how free he is from control.
Merry Christmas!
We're not surrendering, ladies and gentlemen.
America and the world is awake.
Freedom is rising,
and Merry Christmas from Infowars.com.
But then he remembers that the point of all this
is to push his products,
so then there's another few minutes
where he calms down and talks about the great deals
you can get at InfowarsStore.com.
There's a war on Christmas.
There's a war on America.
There's a war on our free speech.
There's a war on the family's very existence.
And those very same forces that have it out for Christianity
have it out for Infowars
and have it out for you and your family.
But we need you to go to InfowarsStore.com
this Christmas.
We need you to fund Infowars
by getting great products you need.
We've got huge sales going right now.
And this completes the selection process.
After spending 15 minutes literally just running around
and screaming at people,
anyone still watching is probably a prime target
for his advertising.
So you get three whole minutes of him explaining to you
how cheap the deals are.
Everything's still more expensive than the equivalent
you can find at, like, any other store.
But that's not the point.
The point is you're supporting the Info War.
You're saving the world with free speech
and fight bad men.
I'm so glad I can fight back against control
by purchasing iodine.
So we find here that the War on Christmas
is a decent way of getting very gullible people
to pay attention long enough
that you can direct sell them diet supplements.
And we've seen how for people whose business model
involves straying close to legal action,
something ridiculous and silly like the War on Christmas
is kinda a gimme.
You can accuse the bad people coalition
of secret Christmas crimes and you're safe
because imaginary people you made up can't sue you.
However, we still haven't fully discovered
why the War on Christmas specifically has
such a strong appeal to the kinds of sad people
who make up Info War's customer base
or why conservatives see such an appeal
in believing Christmas is under attack in the first place.
So to find out more, I, uh, got bored
and decided to invent a new recipe for eggnog.
Well, there you have it.
The War on Christmas is over.
And I guess Christmas won because it turned out
that there never was a war on it.
Oh, well. I think eggs go bad pretty quick, don't they?
♪♪
Oh, my tummy and brain.
I microwaved this earlier to warm it up
and now there's definitely bits of paint loose in it.
Thanks, Neil.
Oh, I think I'm cross-faded on paint fumes and alcohol.
Oh, no, it's happening.
I've lost enough IQ points that I think IQ is real
and that means I'm fucked up enough
to watch a PragerU video.
PragerU is a YouTube channel funded by oil
and fracking barons and other related think tanks
which likes to masquerade as a university.
Honestly, you don't even need to look up the topics they cover.
If you find a list of their major donors,
you can pretty easily guess the entirety
of their video output.
They make five-minute long videos
which feature next to no research or evidence
but they have a lot of money to spend on infographics
and getting special guests to read their scripts
and that's basically the same thing as being true.
This one on the War on Christmas is called
Just Say Merry Christmas.
This is the usual stuff we've seen before
but presented in a new way.
I mean, literally, it's just a repurposed Bill O'Reilly script
complete with an aside about how it's the secularists' fault.
The opponents of Merry Christmas
and other uses of the word Christmas
know exactly what they're doing.
The opponents of Christmas? What the fuck?
They're disingenuous when they dismiss defenders
of Merry Christmas as fabricating some,
quote, war on Christmas.
Of course it's a war on Christmas
or more precisely,
a war on the religious nature of America.
When I first watched this video,
this image kept coming back to me
of a person who says happy holidays
and laughs at people who think the war on Christmas is real
morphing into an enemy combatant.
Why was this imagery necessary?
Why take people laughing at you
for believing a made-up thing,
accuse them of knowing exactly what they're doing,
and then reveal them to be trying
to destroy America's nature?
And then I realized that this is the actual core
of the whole thing.
This image actually explains
more about the conservative ideology
than anything else we've covered here.
You see, Dennis Prager and ideologues like him
have for quite a while been encountering
this one small problem,
which is that their ideas are wrong.
This is why, if you watch any of PragerU's other videos,
they're full of completely hysterical,
imaginary graphs,
most of which don't even label their axes.
What even is this?
And often they make outright false claims
and tell clear lies.
Sometimes they fabricate ridiculous quotes
and put quotations around them as if to say,
look at this ridiculous thing
people who disagree with you say,
but the quote is something they made up.
No one actually said this.
They made it up and attributed it to some imaginary enemy
to try to convince you that this is what people
who aren't like you believe, so you must be right.
This constant lying and misrepresentation of reality
makes my point for me.
To get you to believe what they believe,
they have to lie because the truth simply isn't enough
to support these beliefs.
The bulk of PragerU consists of strategies
to get around the fact they don't have a leg to stand on
when it comes to the truth,
and this is where the war on Christmas
and similar conspiracy theories comes in
because when a belief system is on shaky ground
when it comes to the truth,
it needs something else to maintain it,
extra beliefs and fantasies to prop it all up.
Otherwise, doubts and anxieties start to come in.
What if I'm wrong?
What if I've missed something?
What if other people are laughing at me?
What better way to put a stop to these feelings
than to convince yourself your enemies
are trying to destroy your culture,
even your holidays,
that they're even doing it on purpose
and know they're doing it
because they're the bad guys and you're the good guys?
Instantly, all your doubts and fears
that you've missed something,
all critical thinking can be dismissed.
Life stops being about reason or evidence
and starts being about the war
to protect your ways from the bad ways.
Right and wrong don't matter anymore.
They are conspiring to destroy you.
When you don't say Merry Christmas,
you're stealing my holiday from me.
They even have a little animation
where a kid beats up Santa Claus.
This is how persecuted the far right
need to convince themselves they are
to escape from the much simpler conclusion
that some of the things they believe aren't true.
Everyone has to be out to get them.
Even by saying Happy Holidays,
you're kicking the shit out of their dreams.
Imagine something you enjoy, something you love.
The bad guys hate it.
They'll call it racist and patriarchal
and try to destroy it.
You're smart. You think good things.
Their ideas are weird and strange.
It's okay. It's okay.
You can go back to sleep.
♪♪
You don't have to think too hard
about the fine details of your beliefs
if you also think people are out to get you
for believing them.
You don't have to think about
why the evidence or data contradicts you.
The bad guys are out to destroy your culture,
so they probably made it all up.
It's like we're so busy in America
trying to promote tolerance,
but this tolerance is intolerating everything
except Christianity.
You look at Christians as narrow-minded bigots,
but the opposite is actually true.
Christianity is being bigoted against.
We're under attack.
If you're against my intolerance of others,
you're attacking me.
Conservative Christians must be the real victims
of bigotry in the world.
I'm not wrong.
There's just a war against my beliefs.
How convenient.
And it's once again the person of the Lord Jesus Christ
that is under attack, but the Bible says,
no weapon formed against us shall be able to prosper.
So we're gonna be all right.
Tell that to Constantinople, baby!
Ha ha ha ha!
Prager ends his video by summing up
his victim complex for me.
By not wishing me a Merry Christmas,
you are not being inclusive.
You are excluding me
from one of my nation's national holidays.
So please, say Merry Christmas
and Christmas party
and Christmas vacation.
If you don't, you're not inclusive.
You're hurtful.
Private military contractors,
on the other hand, are fine!
What the fuck?!
Ah, what a delightfully unbiased video.
No political agenda here.
This course was made possible by a generous donation
from Reagan.com!
A great example of how this imaginary sense
of victimhood excuses flaws in the rest
of the belief system is present in this video.
Prager briefly sums up what he calls
the inclusiveness argument.
Let's see how he summarizes it.
That Merry Christmas or Christmas party
or Christmas vacation is not inclusive.
Now, what he's saying kind of makes sense here, doesn't it?
If there's going to be an event during the holiday season
that's traditionally called a Christmas party
but some people who don't celebrate Christmas
might also be invited to it,
some people might argue that calling it a holiday party
is a more appropriate name than a Christmas party.
Now, personally, I don't think it really matters
what you call a party and I also don't really think
many non-Christians will decide not to go to an event
simply because it's called a Christmas event
but I do see the overall point of the inclusiveness argument.
It is maybe a little more appropriate a name
for a gathering of people and I don't really think
there's anything wrong with naming something like that
in the hopes it makes some people feel
more recognized and included.
It's just not a big deal.
The argument seems fairly decent to me.
So what is Dennis' rebuttal to this argument?
Well, his problem is he doesn't really have one.
He simply asks who is really being excluded
and uses this to segue into an actually unrelated
final point which we'll get to later
but his actual rebuttal is provided
in how he presents this argument
which is that this entire argument is just a trick
you shouldn't listen to at all.
Let's look at how he sets up the inclusiveness argument
in the video.
Activists on the left will eventually seek
to remove Christmas as a national holiday.
Now, the left doesn't announce that its agenda
is to thoroughly secularize American and European societies.
Instead, they offer the inclusiveness argument.
The leftist secularists, an all-powerful cult,
are trying to change the nature of America
but they can't just walk around all day saying,
I'm evil and want to destroy Christmas
so they came up with this argument instead
but it's not their real reason so you should ignore it.
The argument might sound reasonable
but you shouldn't think about it
because they're bad and have an evil agenda.
This masks the actual truth
which is that the inclusiveness argument
is actually fairly cogent.
Dennis can't give a rebuttal to that
because it's a really simple, small point
that just makes sense
but admitting that means conceding
that sometimes it's nice to make people feel included
which destroys the entire war on Christmas argument
so instead, he reframes the argument as a fake trick
by a group of people who want to remove religion from society
who are only pretending to want people to feel included
and this is how persecution complexes function
in making people retain their ideas.
If you make a decent enough argument
that they can't give a rebuttal to,
they can just fantasize about how it's a trick.
This inclusive argument plays
on Americans' highly developed sense of decency.
They're just trying to play on your sense of decency
as opposed to expecting you to do a really basic decent thing.
It's all part of the secret secularist plot
by the secularists to bring about their state religion,
secularism.
Most people do not realize
that the left believes in secularism
as fervently as religious Jews and Christians
believe in the Bible.
I'm sorry, what?
That doesn't make any fucking sense, Dennis!
What does that mean?
Who the fuck do secularists pray to?
Fucking Aquaman?
I did it. I did the joke.
I did the thing again.
Do you remember it? Do you remember?
Do you remember?
♪♪
So there we have it.
I think we figured out the purpose of the war on Christmas.
Sometimes it's to grab people's attention
either to sell advertising space
or to directly sell supplements, soy pills, and buttons,
but on a deeper level, it's a fantasy of victimhood
that helps to support an underlying belief system
that doesn't have facts to support it otherwise.
You're not wrong.
They're just out to get you.
Who's they?
It's whoever you want it to be.
Oh, and here's one last quick incidental thing
that happens to tie all of this together.
Prager's old war on Christmas video
fills time by talking about how a Jewish person
wrote White Christmas.
That's why it's not surprising
that it was an American Jew, Irving Berlin,
who wrote White Christmas,
one of America's most popular Christmas songs.
In fact, according to a Jewish musician
writing in the New York Times,
almost all the most popular Christmas songs
were written by Jews.
Apparently, all these American Jews
felt quite included by Christmas.
So there we go.
Non-Christians will never feel excluded by Christmas
because 70 years ago,
a Jewish person wrote a song with Christmas in it.
Dennis thinks this is a great point,
and you can tell he thinks it's great
because he wrote it into the script
for this year's video about Christmas as well.
And in perfect melting pot fashion,
Irving Berlin, the son of a rabbi,
wrote the definitive Yuletide song,
White Christmas.
Ah, it's such a clever point.
You might as well use it twice.
Unfortunately for Dennis,
Irving Berlin didn't just write
exactly one song about Christmas
then disappear into the void.
He actually lived on and wrote a few songs
that might even be a bit inconvenient
for Dennis' argument.
He also composed a little ditty
called Happy Holiday.
That's right. The same guy behind White Christmas
also wrote the other incredibly iconic Christmas song,
the one that opened and closed
Bing Crosby's big Christmas show for many years.
Apparently, Irving Berlin wrote
Happy Holidays into his lyrics
because that's a completely normal thing to say,
and the use of the phrase has nothing to do
with political correctness.
Incidentally, White Christmas was composed
for a film called Holiday Inn,
which also has Happy Holiday on the soundtrack.
This fact isn't particularly meaningful here,
but I thought it was funny.
Dennis Prager obviously knows all this.
If he knows about Irving Berlin,
he surely knows his other popular songs
and their titles.
He's not stupid.
He knows it's normal to say Happy Holidays at Christmas.
It's impossible to miss this fact
even if you do basic research.
Hell, even one of the articles he cites in the video
mentions that White Christmas was written for Holiday Inn,
but for his videos, he performatively pretends
these facts don't exist because PragerU
is a fake university designed to sell
a broken belief system so its donors can continue
to profit from the status quo,
and at the end of the day,
isn't that what Christmas is all about?
No. Well, it shouldn't be, but it is.
Wow, with motion graphics,
you can strawman people easily.
Great idea, Dennis, but what are you gonna do
if other people start doing it to you?
Oh, his mouth fell off.
Merry Christmas, everyone.
See? I can say it,
and I'm king of the male feminists,
so clearly there's no problem here.
Other people do have holidays around now though,
so happy holidays might be more appropriate
in some circumstances.
Anyway, if you're angry
and you need a reason to be angry to do with Christmas,
go to therapy.
Just go to therapy.
If you're angry and you think it's because lesbians
are in a Christmas thing,
you're not actually angry
because people are corrupting Christmas
or infecting your traditions and culture.
You're not even angry
because of political correctness or leftism.
You're angry because you feel expected to be,
because you've built a cage for your mind,
and the solution to that
is to change things about yourself.
Sorry, there isn't anything wrong
that needs to be fixed with the world.
That's you.
I wouldn't be so sure, Harris.
♪♪
Oh, Fortnite Tower Recon Specialist!
You're alive!
Yes, thanks to the magic of Christmas,
I'm real now,
and I'm going to take you on an adventure of discovery
until you convert to whatever Kirk Cameron thinks
is Christianity.
You know, like in reactionary Christian movies.
What is this, a Nostalgia Critic video?
We're not doing that.
We're not parodying a whole movie genre now.
This is the end of the video.
We're done.
But movie parodies are automatically funny
if you know what they're referencing,
so it's easy content,
and you make videos slowly enough already.
This way, half the script writes itself.
Yeah, for the first few minutes, maybe,
but I can't sustain a whole...
You know, I'm sick of this bit, too.
We're done.
That's the end.
You can't just end a video
because you gave up on your own storyline.
Happy winter-enmas, everybody.
♪♪
Christmas.
♪♪
♪♪
Well, we did it.
We technically got a seasonal video out on time.
Join me in October 2022
for the release of this year's Halloween video.
♪♪
But seriously, it's Christmas.
Time for some classic Christmas honesty.
Thanks a lot to everyone who supports me doing this stuff.
Thanks so much to my patrons,
whose names should be somewhere around here right now,
for funding this ridiculous thing that I do with my life.
My patrons have been able to see this video
almost a year in advance.
I put it out when I finished it after Christmas,
so I figured they could see what I was doing.
Patrons normally get to see videos early,
but usually, like, a few days in advance,
not normally that long.
Oh, and the names go in the credits like this.
I also do bonus videos and behind-the-scenes type stuff.
I did a really high-effort video
about the graph that I made for this video,
which is probably the best video I ever made
and barely anyone's gonna see it, so that's nice.
It's been kind of amazing being able to spend all day
writing and researching videos and editing
and Googling how to make nice-looking graphs,
and for that to be my job has been kind of amazing.
I had a really bad year in 2018.
I got out of this very long depression spiral
and didn't really know what I was gonna do
with my life after that,
and I came out in early 2019 to discover
that I somehow had this audience of people
who thought what I did was good and meaningful
and friends who actually seemed to like me
as a person for once,
and as bad as things have been in the last little while,
I can't shake that feeling of just being happy to be here,
so thank you so much.
I don't think I'll ever be thankful enough, but thank you.
Well, that's the Christmas video.
I hope you liked it.
I mean, this video kind of had a weird ending, didn't it?
That slow-zoom joke is a bit niche.
I don't think many people are gonna,
no, wait, stop!
Wow, frozen much?
I know it's cold in here, but come on, guy.
Ha ha, now that's what I call-
♪♪♪
♪♪♪
