Kurzgesagt is lying to you, in every video, even in this one, because our videos distill
very complex subjects into flashy 10-minute pieces and, unfortunately, reality is, well,
complicated.
The question of how we deal with that is central to what we do on this channel and something
we think about a lot.
What we mean by lying is the concept of lies to children.
The idea that on the path to explaining something complicated, you start off with a little lie,
a useful oversimplification that makes it easier to grasp a concept.
For example, as a kid you learned that the Earth is a sphere orbiting the sun with planet
bodies.
But it's not actually a sphere and the bodies are super different in size and not close
to each other at all.
By beginning at a place of oversimplification, you're building a framework, a foundation,
that you can then build upon and add nuance and complexity later on.
Step by step, you're getting towards the real gist of the complicated subject.
Science communication has to use lies to children to some degree or it turns into science education.
And getting a proper education in all of the scientific fields would take years of intense
study to become fluent in them.
As a species, we have a major interest in summarizing science and its advancements and
educating as many people about it as possible because we all benefit if more people have
a fact-based scientific worldview.
We will discuss what science is and how it works in different videos in more detail,
but for now let's just say it's a process to advance, organize, predict, and test our
knowledge about the universe.
If you understand the current state of scientific knowledge, then you can make better decisions
based on facts and testable ideas rather than outdated belief systems or our intuition
that evolved to protect our ancestors from lions but is no longer suited for the complexity
of our modern world.
Our brains are comically ill-prepared to navigate the fast-moving world we happen to live in
today, a world ironically created by science.
A few hundred years ago, it was possible to be knowledgeable at an expert level in pretty
much every field of study.
In the information age, this is a futile endeavor since knowledge and data are increasing exponentially.
So to even have a chance of grasping the world we live in, we need summaries that give us,
if not a true understanding of all the details, a solid overview.
Explaining science to many people is not about enlightening the ignorant but necessary for
the progress of our species at large.
To make this possible, we need to find metaphors and stories that capture the true nature of
things as much as possible while using a language that our brains can deal with.
A great example here is physics.
Quarks are often depicted as blue, red, and green with different spins.
But just saying spin and using colors forces our brain to imagine colorful spinning balls,
which is great to visualize the different types and the relationships between quarks
but also creates a very wrong image of reality in our heads.
Examples are nothing like the neat diagrams that we're taught in school, but buzzing
and vibrating entities held together by something we call charge that describes how certain
things want to be close or escape each other for some unknown reason.
We're describing phenomena that we're pretty sure exist in some form or another because
the maths works out and we can do real-world experiments and predict their results before
we do them.
In reality, these are models, tricks to summarize what we know, make up a coherent story, and
prepare the ground for more in-depth explanations.
Don't confuse the description of a thing for the thing itself.
Simplifications like these are not just meant to dumb things down.
They're actually useful for experts themselves.
For example, chemists who use wrong electron shell models to work out chemical bonds or
scientists using simplified models as the basis for discussion with colleagues across
different scientific fields.
The simplification of science can also be problematic for a bunch of reasons.
Finding the true nature of reality is super hard because our brains did not evolve for
this job and the universe doesn't care if we understand it.
Science is a process to work towards gaining knowledge and not an absolute truth generator.
The answers it provides are multi-layered and nuanced, and that complexity can get lost
when it's simplified, especially when it's done so for headlines.
When interesting cancer study turns into a potential cure, a healthy food becomes the
basis for a new diet.
Such simplifications give a misleading definiteness to science, which goes against its process-like
nature.
When cures don't materialize and diets don't turn out to be magical, we lose confidence
in science and start to think of all science communication as misleading.
Then there's the opposite effect.
If a simplification is too engaging, if the story it tells is too good, it can distort
the true complexity of a subject and give you a false sense of security and an illusion
of deep knowledge.
A gut feeling that you understand the science better than you actually do, which can lead
people to ignore actual experts over their dangerous, superficial knowledge and gut feeling.
And this can have negative consequences for all of us, because in the worst case, overconfidence
in your own understanding of science can lead to bad decisions made with confidence.
Just think of the surge of people that confidently disavow vaccines or climate change without
truly understanding the subject matter.
So considering all of this and the fact that we at Kurzgesagt reach millions of people
with our videos, how do we handle this?
Well, it has been a journey, especially the research.
When we started, we just read articles, then moved on to books, peer-reviewed papers, then
to conversations with experts.
We began to collect our sources.
With every step, we realized that we were still not doing enough.
Nowadays, we try to read as many primary sources as possible, talk to multiple experts and
document our simplifications and give further reading in our sources doc.
But this doesn't make our process flawless.
What do you do if experts disagree with each other?
What do you do if you find an amazing fact that perfectly fits a narrative but just can't
find its primary source?
How do you deal with the reality that many scientific results have huge error bars or
maybes attached to them?
How do you handle complex systems that defy easy answers?
In the end, we make 10-minute videos, so we need to make decisions about what details
and explanations can fit, which aspects need to be simplified, and which parts to cut.
There is no single best answer for how to do this, and so we weigh the different options
every single time.
It can be painful for experts to see their fields simplified.
Some are happy with us, while others don't like it.
This is fair, but also impossible to avoid.
We're still trying to improve and want to be transparent about what we're trying to
do.
For example, we're taking part in the Tresca project about science communication to learn
more.
All of this brings us to the purpose of our videos.
The most important thing we want to do with this channel is to inspire you and spark your
curiosity for science and the amazing universe we live in.
Learning often doesn't feel like fun, but with the right story it is one of the best
things, and we hope to provide that to you.
Ultimately, we hope that we light a fire in you that motivates you to read books, pay
more attention at school or university, and just get interested in a scientific field
or two and learn more on your own.
Not because you have to, but because you want to know more about how the world really works.
Because the universe is beautiful, and science is a way of seeing this beauty more clearly.
And we hope that knowing that we have to simplify a bit does not make you enjoy our videos less.
We are trying to build something with Kurzgesagt, and while we're not 100% sure yet what exactly,
hopefully something that gets people to think about their own life and the context they
exist in today, as well as the far future and the potential we all have as a species.
And of course, how big things are, and what happens when we blow stuff up, because it's fun.
Thanks for watching and sharing and supporting us.
We really can't do this without you.
Running a science communication business is a balancing act that we take extremely seriously.
On the one hand, we need to be responsible and look out for the team and be able to grow
responsibly.
On the other hand, we have to protect the integrity of our videos.
You are enabling us to stay independent, because while we do things like sponsorships or commercial
work, the majority of our income comes directly from you, the burbs.
Kurzgesagt is fundamentally funded by its community, by you.
Because of you, Kurzgesagt is able to invest as much time in our videos and try to become better.
You get our calendar every year, support us on Patreon, and get your personal birds, watch
our videos without adblock or with YouTube Premium.
Our favorite way to keep the channel running are our sciency products from our shop that
hopefully add additional value to the world.
We love bringing little pieces of knowledge into your home or classroom that inspire you
to learn more about the universe in a little more detail, especially with our carefully
researched infographic posters.
Our latest one teaches you about the night sky, and showcases the stars in our night
sky and their special significance for humanity.
With every purchase, you directly support what we do on this channel.
Please don't feel obligated to do so, though.
Watching and sharing is already helping us out a lot, and we are just grateful that so
many of you care about what we try to do here.
Thank you so, so much.
