Hi YouTube. Well, that was fast. At the end of January I made a video thanking the first
100,000 subscribers for joining my channel and now, just 3 months later, the subscribers
have been doubled, which is an unbelievable rate of growth so thank you so much to everyone
who's joined up with me on this little corner of the internet. These last 3 months have
been a crazy, busy time for me with too many projects going on at once and the next 3 months
will probably be the same with more videos and other stuff on the way. But one project
that's finished now, thanks to Hank Green, a man who himself runs so many different things
it's hard to keep track of them all, is the CGP Grey shirt which is now available on the
DFTBA store. In case you're wondering, the proceeds of the shirt will be used to purchase
coffee. That coffee will fuel the typing and clicking needed to manufacture videos, videos
which may contain links to buy the very shirts that brought them into existence, thus completing
the circle of life. So go grab one today if you'd like to support the channel. It's been
amazing making videos for you and watching the channel grow, though now releasing each
video to so many people is slightly intimidating. Even though I take far, far too long researching
each one, I still spend the first few minutes after uploading Living in Fear that I've made
some unintentional error and waiting for the inevitable comment pointing out where
I've made a typo. And there are always typos.
But terror of errors aside, the nice thing about having such a large community is being
able to share not only my own stuff with you, but also other people's videos, either through
hidden links on my own or in separate playlists like the one I've made this week. Though on
these videos I've noticed people often leave comments like Grey's army coming through and
I'm not sure that an army is the best representation of who we are. I'm more a science and technology
guy who likes reason and simple things that turn complex in interesting ways. And since
you're here watching these videos, I assume you are as well. I'm not sure what the best
collective noun for this growing community is, but if you have any thoughts I'd love
to hear them. Anyway, I'm getting off topic. You are the reason I can continue to make
these videos. Thank you for watching and thank you for subscribing.
