Food is arguably the best thing about being alive. No other bodily pleasure is
enjoyed multiple times every day and never gets old. It's an expression of
culture our parents love and a means of celebration or comfort. That's why it
hits a special nerve when we're told we should change what and how we eat to
fight rapid climate change. One of the most delicious foods, meat, gets the worst
press. It doesn't help that the topic is really hard to properly research
yourself and that debates get emotional quickly. But clearly science can give us
an answer. The reality is, well, it's complicated. Let's take a look at three
climate arguments against meat that are used a lot and see what happens.
One. Does our diet really play that bigger role in climate change? Feeding
billions of people is impossible without causing emissions. Even if someday we
have zero carbon tractors, refrigerators and cookers running on renewable energy
and electric trucks to move our food, there are still unavoidable emissions.
Rice emits methane. We cut down forests to make room for pastures and crops. And
we emit nitrous oxide when we use fertilizers and manure. Worldwide food
production is responsible for about 26% of all human made greenhouse gas
emissions, which is unfortunate since food is not optional. While 26% doesn't
sound that bad, it means that even if we extinguished all other sources of
emissions today, the emissions from food alone would still use up our entire
carbon budget by 2100. So no matter how we twist and turn it, food is a real
driver of climate change. Still, emissions from different food items vary a lot.
How do things look when we compare their footprints separately? Food's climate
impact is most often based on life cycle assessments, an analysis that looks at
all the emissions of a product throughout its existence, from production
to transportation, packaging, use and waste management. In the most detailed
meta-analysis of life cycle assessments to date, beef emissions stand out at
the top. On average, a kilogram of beef emits 71 kilograms of co2 equivalents.
Lamb is also high at 40 kilograms. Pork emits 12 and poultry 10 kilograms. At the
bottom we have lots of plant-based foods. Potatoes, for example, emit around 150
times less than beef. The most important aspect of food isn't weight though, it's
nutrient density. A kilogram of beef would keep you alive much longer than a
kilogram of potatoes. So how does the ranking change if we compare emissions
per calorie or protein? Not much. Animal protein is still the most costly for the
environment and beef and lamb are also outliers in emissions per calorie. But is
this fair? After all, not all beef is the same. There are all sorts of ways to rear
cattle from pure grass-fed to factory farming. The worst beef comes in at 105
kilograms of emissions per 100 grams of protein, the best at only nine. A
tenfold difference. In contrast, most other foods, especially plant-based, have
a much narrower spectrum. Still, the best beef is worse than the worst plant. Okay,
but this seems promising. Can we buy the right beef and lower our emissions? Maybe
by buying locally produced beef to minimize our footprint? Two, does buying
local food actually matter? Let's stick with beef since it's such an outlier. By
buying locally, you are trying to avoid emissions from transportation and
packaging. But it turns out these only account for 0.5 to 2% of beef's total
emissions. Actually, transport and packaging combined are only about 11% of
all food emissions. Nearly all food transport emissions are produced over
the last few miles, the regional travel on the road supplying the markets and
shops in your area. International food transport happens mostly on freight
ships, which are insanely efficient. For example, shipping one kilogram of
avocados from South America to Europe generates about 0.3 kilograms of CO2
equivalents in transport emissions and around 2.5 kilograms overall, while one
kilogram of beef from your local butcher will come in at 18 kilograms in CO2
equivalents at least. So even when shipped great distances, emissions from
almost all plant-based foods cause lower emissions than locally produced animal
products. Okay, so if transport doesn't play a big role, what causes the vast
amounts of emissions from beef then? By far the largest share of beef emissions
consists of methane released directly by the animals. While CO2 hangs around for
centuries, methane only stays in the atmosphere for decades. But in these
short periods, it is very powerful. All in all, methane has already caused 23 to 40
percent of human-made warming so far. There's controversy about how bad this
is exactly, and we don't want to dive in too deep here, but the way things stand,
any kinds of extra emissions are not great. Still, all cows burp and fart to
similar degrees. What explains the spectrum of beef emissions? There are a
couple of things. It makes a difference if the beef comes from a dairy herd or
one dedicated to beef production. 44% of the world's beef comes from dairy cows
sharing its footprint with dairy products. Dairy cows tend to get
higher quality feed which makes them grow faster and emit less methane.
Geography also plays a role because it determines which farming methods are
possible. The worst factor by far is the destruction of forests for farmland. Not
only does this release the CO2 that was bound in the flora, it sets free carbon
that was stored in the soil and destroys its ability to store it in the future.
This aspect accounts for much of the range of emissions in beef. The worst
emitters are farms burning down rainforest for farmland, especially in
Brazil. There is a sinister truth hidden here. The more animals suffer, the better
they are in terms of climate change because they are way more efficient. They
use less land and their food is brought right to them and so they grow faster
and don't expend energy on things like walking. Cattle in a factory farm that
never get to roam pastures can sometimes be less destructive for the climate than
cattle grazing peacefully on a formerly lush piece of rainforest. But isn't it a
bit out of touch with reality to demonize cows so much? Some of the land
these animals are grazing on isn't suitable for crops anyway. By grazing on
pastures, they can turn things we can't digest into food. Isn't farming animals
just a smart way to make the best use of unused resources? Three. Don't cows mainly
use land that we can't use for agriculture or other things? About half
of the world's ice and desert-free land is used for agriculture, an area the
size of the entire Americas plus China. Half of all agriculturally used land is
dedicated to animals. Most of it is grassland, 65% of which cannot be
converted to cropland. So pasturing animals is actually a very efficient way
to use those areas since we can't grow human food there anyway. There are a
couple of catches here though. While the idea of cows turning useless grass into
steak is nice, it is part of a marketing lie. Even though it is so massive,
pastureland alone can't support the ruminants living on it. Globally, grazing
systems sustain only 13% of beef production. So if we were to switch to
100% grass-fed, we'd simply have to eat much less beef. In the US, beef
production would crash by some 70% if it were to exclusively rely on grass. The
only way to sustain our high demand for meat is by growing crops and feeding
them to our cattle. And we haven't even talked about chicken and pigs, which
exclusively eat feed crops. Because of this feed demand, less than half of the
world's cereals are used directly as human food. 41% is fed to animals. The
same is true for soy. There's a lot of talk about Amazon deforestation for soy
production, which makes us think of soy milk and tofu. But only 19% of global soy
production goes towards products for humans. About 77% is used to feed animals.
Besides, land without food crops isn't automatically ecologically useless. A
beef-free diet would free up around 2 billion hectares, a vegan diet would free
up around 3 billion hectares of land. We could use this land to grow forests or
restore wild grasslands, basically anything that could suck carbon out of
the atmosphere. If we spent 3 billion hectares of land, it could remove about
8 billion tons of CO2 from the air per year. By comparison, we emit about 50
billion tons of CO2 equivalents per year at the moment. That means we could save
16% of emissions by eating a vegan diet. Okay, to summarize, food is a huge driver
of emissions. Meat, but especially beef, is the worst food in terms of emissions.
Buying locally does not have a big impact on food emissions compared to the
type of food you're consuming. When it comes to beef, cattle that are grass-fed
can sometimes even be counterproductive because they just need much more land.
Even if you find the most environmentally friendly beef in the
world, your burger still comes with a significantly higher carbon footprint
than a veggie patty. You can decide for yourself what you want to do with this
information. In fact, you are always only one decision away from making a change.
You could start learning a new skill or dive into a new interest today. It's up
to you. If only that first step wasn't so hard to take. We have something for you
to make it a little easier. We are big fans of Skillshare, an online learning
community that offers thousands of classes for all skill levels in tons of
creative disciplines like illustration, animation, or film and video. There's
something for everyone, really. Unlimited access to all the classes is less than
$10 a month with an annual premium membership. The first 1000 Kurzgesagt
viewers to click the link in the description will get a one-month free
trial of Skillshare. Since we started working with Skillshare, you, our viewers,
have taken over 100,000 hours of classes, including our own three Skillshare
classes on how we make our animations. In them, you will learn all the basics like
how to set up your project and layers, but also more details about how we work
with tools and timing. You'll get to recreate typical Kurzgesagt scenes with
our very own illustrations and get a sneak peek into the work process of our
animators. If you've always been curious about animation, give it a try. But
anything that makes you feel excited and sparks new ideas is a great first step.
If you want to get creative with new skills and support Kurzgesagt, give it a
go. Hey, psst, there are still a few extra shiny calendars left. This year they feature
lots of forgotten dinosaurs and other creatures. So grab one of the last copies
and make a loved one or yourself happy. Thanks so much for your support.
