Welcome to ContraPoints. I'm your host, John Jane… Jackson. Whatever. It doesn't matter.
Tonight our guests are Sir Beatrix Bumbridge, prominent sadomasochist and 17th Marquis de
Baton Rouge, and Abigail Cockbane, feminist activist and author of You Can Come For Free
At Home, The Case Against Prostitution. Tonight, they'll be debating the question,
Is BDSM Feminist? Now, Sir Beatrix, you are a prominent kinkster, and according to your
FetLife profile, you live the lifestyle 24-7, and are into paddling, bondage, penis humiliation,
panty sniffing, CMNF, CFNM, and… ass worship. Indeed. Would you call yourself a feminist?
Please explain.
Well, John, feminism is all about a woman's right to choose. And that means that if she
chooses to have her husband tie her legs to stride the dishwasher and pummel her backside
till it flushes with the fuchsia flair of a newborn's cheek, that's her right as
a woman, so long as she does so in a safe, sane, consensual way.
I see. And Ms. Cockbane, what do you think of that?
Well, it's all good and fine to talk about choice. But don't we also have to talk about
the contexts in which our choices are made? In patriarchal, pornographic society, where
women are constantly pressured to submit to male dominance, is there really any meaningful
sense in which women can genuinely consent to sexual subjugation?
Well, Cockbane, I think it's not really your place to question whether an adult woman
knows what she wants. But the thing is, I don't care what you want. I don't care
what your girlfriend wants. If you want to have your little leather costume parties and
beat each other senseless, I don't care. Well, clearly you care a little bit.
Everything isn't all about you and your special little sexual whims. Do these submissive
women ever pause to wonder why they enjoy being dominated and abused? Do they think
they just came out of the womb with a desire to be tortured and humiliated by men? Or does
it ever occur to them that just maybe a lifetime of cultural glorification of female submission
has influenced their desires? Well, if you're such an expert psychoanalyst,
then why don't you explain why there are men who want to be dominated, and women who
want to be dominated by other women? Well, patriarchy affects everyone, and just
because you're a lesbian or a man doesn't mean you're not influenced by the same cultural
pressures and reproducing the same power dynamics. But every choice we make is influenced by
cultural pressure. I mean, if cultural pressure renders our choices illegitimate, then I suppose
all choice is an illusion, and we should just give up on the idea of freedom altogether.
Well, hold on a minute. Don't you think Ms. Cockbane has a point? Isn't it worth questioning
where our desires come from instead of just taking them as given?
Questioning, sure. We live in a dark world, and maybe that's why we have dark desires.
But society's problems can't be fixed in a lifetime, and we all have to live with the
desires we have. So if I choose, in full knowledge of the darkness, that I want to act out my
dark fantasies in a responsible way with consenting adults, then I don't see what basis the Abigail
Cockbains of the worlds have to scold me for my choice.
Well, well, well. Choice and consent are not magic words that make everything feminist.
Anti-abolitionists once argued that slaves were happier as slaves, and there are sex-trafficking
victims today who are so internally oppressed that they believe they consented to their
own subjection. But that doesn't make it okay, it doesn't make it a real choice, and it certainly
doesn't make it feminist. What is this absurd equivocation between violent
coercion and vague cultural influences? Do you really not see the difference between
being locked in chains at gunpoint and simply wanting to do something because you saw it
in a movie? But when the thing you want to do is be tortured,
then no, you don't see much difference. Torture? Oh, this is good.
According to the International Council for Rehabilitation of Torture Victims, beating,
shocking, stretching, submersing, and suffocating are among the most common methods of torture,
and it is not legal to consent to torture. Fuck this.
So the sexual practices you're advocating are not only illegal and immoral, but are
actually in violation of the United Nations Convention Against Torture.
And Sir Beatrix, how do you respond to that? Sir Beatrix? Sir Beatrix, please remove the gimp mask.
I'm going to my happy place. My name is Lady Bumbridge.
Well, we'll give him a moment. To be fair, Ms. Cockbane, I do think your argument is a little
bit out of line here. Do you really not see the difference between involuntary torture
and consensual masochism done for the sake of pleasure?
Well, John, I just don't see what's pleasurable about it.
But some people do find it pleasurable. Sir Beatrix, are you ready? Could you please
comment on this? All right. Look, Cockbane,
your problem is you just have a naive idea about what pleasure and pain are. Since you
radical feminists are so good at deconstructing false binaries, why don't you have a go at the
pleasure-pain distinction? Well, it's just inconceivable to me that there could be anything
pleasurable about being whipped and bound and abused. Have you ever gone running? Ever heard
of a runner's high? What about very spicy food? You know, pain and pleasure are often mixed.
Sometimes the road to heaven leads through hell. I just don't see how that applies to sex. I just
can't imagine being turned on by the firm grip of master's hands around my thighs as he bites the
side of my neck, my back arching as the straps are tightened around my wrists and ankles, yes,
in a shiver up my spine as I anticipate the first drop of hot candle wax in my pert exposed breasts,
and the intense full-body shock that surges through me as his flogger cracks across my
innocent pale buttocks, awakening my inner goddess and dissolving me into a deliquescent
paradise of shuddering orgasms. No, I just don't see anything arousing about that. Okay. Well,
if I didn't know any better, I'd say at the very least you seem a little bit curious. Well,
so what if I am curious? There are plenty of victims whose sexual fantasies are shaped by
their own traumas, but that doesn't make it okay. Are you a victim of trauma? Hey, well no,
but here you go. Can you please try to be civil? Don't ask intrusive questions. I'm sorry,
I just resent the implication that sexual kinks are the result of trauma. Well,
it was still out of line. I'm just saying that it's a false and harmful misconception about kink
that you shouldn't be propagating on your show. All right. Well, fair enough. Anyway,
we're running out of time. Let me just say for the record that my kinks have nothing to do with
any past trauma. I'm really completely fine. I'm fine. I'm fine. I'm completely fine. I hate my
job. I got involved with kink in the most innocent possible way. You see, when I was a boy, my family
had a Japanese governess who used to dress me up in my sister's clothes. Every day when I came
home from school, she would pick out a new frilly dress for me, and she would brush my hair. I can
still remember the way the stockings felt as she unrolled them up my legs. Never had I known such
rapture. At least, until one day when father came home early. Oh no. Oh no. Honey, I'm home. What
is the meaning of this? Oh god. It's all rushing back, man. Oh no. I'm a sissy bitch. I'm a sissy
bitch. Bad. Bad. Bad. Bad. Bad. Bad. Bad. Bad. Bad. Bad. Well, thank you both for coming on. Tonight,
we learned that on this stage we call the world, men, women, and the rest of us actors
are all just kinda fucked up. So, it's best not to think too much about these things,
because rational discourse leads nowhere and introspection only uncovers the terrible traumas
of your past which you wish you had remembered to forget. In fact, I suppose sometimes it's
better to just get drunk and leave a comment on a YouTube video. So, from the ContraPoint
studio here in Baltimore, I bid you all good night. Alright, whose hand is on my thigh?
Special thanks to Ben Palmer, Romy Goya, Emanuel Mwangi, Jessica Hazard-White,
Julius Niepore-Golison, Ewan, Sarek, Pofo, Thea Williams, David the Benevolent Malevolence,
Michael C. Johnson, J. Michael Comfort, Nick Wolf, Garrett Lathy, Slimeball Baitlin,
Elias Jackson, Arielle Elliott, Man Silverblattstunstrum, Gorb, Jonathan Masino,
Rob Hotz, Jason Wolter, Pharaoh Kimchi, Max, Krista Svanlund, Butz Epps, Unknown Email,
Ludmila Marsova, Percy Steamboat, Eris, Carter Kalchick, Robert Phillips,
Your Friendly Neighborhood Anarchist, Erin Ho, Neil Dax Dealer of Souls, Forone, NoNoNo,
Raymond Einrich, Heterodox, Roman Ulyashev, Kat Stas, and the other patrons who make me jingle.
It's 5.30am, what the fuck am I doing?
