Hello, Comrade Trixie.
Hello, Bruce.
So how's, uh, how's your week been?
Look, it doesn't matter.
This is a framing device.
Just get to the...
What do you want?
Well, that's not very friendly, but I was just wondering if you heard about that, uh,
Nazi getting punched.
Oh yeah, I heard.
Pretty fucking funny, right?
Yeah, it's pretty funny.
Well, you don't sound very enthusiastic.
Look, babes, you know, it's a man getting attacked in the street.
And he was a Nazi, so whatever, but there's kind of a limit on how excited I'm gonna get
about that.
I see.
Well, how predictably bourgeois of you.
Well, is it bourgeois not to smash people's faces in the street when you disagree with
them?
Yeah, that's pretty bourgeois.
Fuck you.
Not people you disagree with, you idiot.
Fucking Nazis.
People who actually endorse genocide.
You're not going to seriously defend them, are you?
Well, I'm not going to defend them, I'm just saying that last time I checked, people have
a right to express their political opinions without being clocked on the side of the fucking
head.
Well, what I want to know is why you liberals are so eager to come to the defense of the
poor oppressed Nazis, and so quiet about the systemic violence that threatens the lives
of marginalized people in this country every goddamn day.
I'm not quiet about that, I have a whole fucking YouTube channel about it.
Oh, wow.
Well here, have some brownie points for your heroic YouTube activism.
Alright.
I can't win with people like you, can I?
Why are we friends again?
Don't interrogate the framing device.
Why am I friends with anyone?
Socrates, what is friendship?
Alright, so maybe you're not defending Nazis, but you are tolerating them, and I'd like
to know when you think is the right time to take action.
Is it when the first minorities start being loaded onto trains, or would you prefer to
wait until the smoke is rising from the first extermination camp?
Oh, don't be so fucking dramatic.
Richard Spencer is not going to be running any extermination camps.
He's part of a despised fringe group with no real power.
Donald Trump is not part of a fringe group, but he's not exterminating anyone.
Well tell that to the millions of people who are about to lose their health insurance.
Tell that to the women who are going to die from their botched back-alley abortions.
I mean, tell that to the refugees who are about to be sent back to their home countries
where they're all going to be fucking killed.
So what are you suggesting?
We just start killing Republicans because you think their policies are dangerous?
All that education and no brain.
No shithead.
I'm saying that we have a goddamn duty to disrupt the rhetoric that misleads people
into supporting those policies in the first place.
Disrupt it by punching people in the face.
Why do you keep tearing up over this poor little Nazi with a black eye?
Do I look like I'm crying to you?
I just happen to believe in a little thing you may have forgotten about called democracy.
Oh don't you start that.
Let me finish.
Politics is based on a norm of reciprocity, which means I treat my opponents the way I
expect them to treat me.
If I start punching people out to silence their political speech, how can I reasonably
expect them not to do the same to me?
You know, it's cute.
It's actually fucking adorable that you think that Nazis will uphold some norm of
reciprocity.
It's not what I think.
You know, you feel safe because you're white and privileged, and you think you can just
have a reasonable discussion with these people.
I don't think so.
You're fucking wrong.
They might not kill you as soon as the Jews or the blacks, but when the fascist scum take
over, they will come for you.
And when they do, they're not going to give a shit that you tolerated them when you had
the upper hand.
Can I talk?
No.
You need to hear this, so shut up and listen.
I've seen your videos.
You seem to think that the rise of white nationalism is just a laugh a minute wrong.
But what you need to understand is you're a cis white man, and you're privileged that
all of this is just an intellectual exercise to you.
But guess what?
To people of color, and to trans people, and to women, and to immigrants and refugees,
this is a matter of life and death.
Can I say something?
No.
Shut your mouth.
I know your audience is small, but you still have a platform, and you have an obligation
to use it responsibly.
But you know what you are?
You're just a profiteer who exploits social justice for money and attention.
Oh, come on.
You take social justice topics and you reduce them to digestible little pieces of infotainment.
That's all you do.
But then you have the audacity to tell real activists what to think and what methods they
can use.
That's not what I'm doing.
Shut up.
You are the culture industry's effort to subsume and neutralize social justice by making you
safe and palatable for mass consumption.
Mass consumption?
This cross-dressing nonsense is just you riding the wave of public interest and transgender
liberation.
No, no, no.
It's a great breed of bullshit, and you know it.
If you let me talk for one second, I'd explain why that's not fair.
Don't you get it?
You don't get to decide what's fair.
You don't get to show up every couple weeks with some glib burlesque, then collect your
Patreon money and walk away to your champagne and pearls.
Let's not make this about the pearls.
The pearls are…
I'm keeping the pearls.
The pearls are not up for discussion.
You seem to think you're actually helping something, when all you're doing is getting
in the way of real activism.
You are as problematic as it gets, motherfucker.
You make jokes about eating disorders, you're dismissive of cultural appropriation.
So you just want a lecture meal.
And I notice you've got some new outfit every week.
That's good, claiming to advocate social justice while supporting an exploitative textile
industry.
If you don't stop talking, I'm gonna punch you in the face.
You think you're a good person?
Well, you're not.
You're the moral equivalent of a modern-day slave owner, and you wash it all down with
a little casual transphobia, which you think is so fuckin' cute…
What a pisser.
I daresay I've earned a round of golf.
Fuck you.
Fuckin' shit.
Yes.
Fuck you.
Fuck.
Fuckin' shit.
You've at least got to admit, violence is kind of fun, isn't it?
Yep, I guess it is.
The only way it would be more fun is if somebody got seriously hurt.
Well, I'm glad we agree on something.
Look, why don't we give this conversation another shot?
Yeah, I guess.
So, I appreciate your tolerant attitude toward fascist speech, I really do.
Normally your view is the right one, and I see that you're coming from a good place,
but you have to understand that this is not a normal situation.
Fascism isn't just any old political worldview.
It's like a malignant tumor that infects the discourse and ruins every liberal norm.
Well, there's no need to help it along by destroying liberal norms in the name of opposing
it.
You still don't get it.
Violence is the only way to stop this.
Fascism is inherently violent, and debate does nothing.
Violence is the only language fascists understand.
Hitler himself said it, that the only way his movement could have been stopped is if
it had been brutally smashed in its infancy.
Well, don't you think Hitler was overestimating the inevitability of his own success?
People like Hitler don't like to imagine that they could fail, and you give him too
much credit.
You always talk about fascism like it's this hopelessly attractive doctrine instead
of the pretty shabby and repulsive thing that it is.
What you're not getting is that it's designed to be seductive, to be irresistible.
Well, I think you're overstating the case.
I don't feel seduced by fascism.
I mean, it would be kind of nice to actually be proud of my own race for once and of my
own country.
And it can get frustrating being a leftist as a white man.
Are you fucking serious right now?
Because no matter how well you think you've thought through your opinions, any woman,
trans person, or person of color can invalidate them in an instant, just by mentioning their
own personal experiences.
Your political worldview has to be this kind of patchwork of other people's testimony
because your own experiences are tainted by privilege, so you're always sort of alienated
from your political views in that way.
And it would also be nice to get rid of this constant self-doubt and neuroticism, and to
be able to stop saying, I'm sorry that I invaded your space with my whiteness and my
masculinity.
I'll try to be meeker and quieter from now on.
I mean, how great would it be to just be able to say, I am a white man, and my experience
is valid.
Oh my god.
I am beautiful, and I'm proud of being beautiful.
I'm strong, and I'm proud of being strong.
Yes.
Yes.
Hail victory.
Hail Trump.
I am no mere golden man.
I am a golden god.
Wow, dude.
Wow.
I don't know how I got the hammer.
I thought you had it.
Well, I've got it back, and I'm going to bash your fashy face in if you don't stop
this fucking shit.
Oh, calm down.
I was just kidding with you.
Well, it was a little too convincing.
Well, you know, your problem is you won't even allow yourself to enter the emotional
space of the right.
Intellectually, you and I agree on almost everything.
The difference is that you're a leftist with all your heart, whereas I'm only three
quarters of the way there.
I have this one quadrant of my heart that's like a little fascist heart, and it makes
me feel right-wing emotions.
Things like, this is politically correct bullshit.
That's a thought that I have unironically, like, at least once a week.
Not so much a thought, I guess, as a feeling.
This is politically correct bullshit.
And I know that it's wrong, so I don't say it.
Well, okay, sometimes it actually is politically correct bullshit, but most of the time it's
wrong.
But it's still a feeling that I have.
And that's why I can talk to the right.
And you can sense that, and it's why you don't trust me.
Well, now I definitely don't trust you.
That's because people like you refuse to have their ideological purity tainted by the
subtlety and ambiguity of the world.
No, it's because I refuse to associate with people who sympathize with an ideology that
wants me and my family and friends dead.
I didn't say I had sympathies, I said I had right-wing feelings.
And I don't have much control over my feelings, but I can control my thoughts, and that's
why public debate is so important.
I've changed my mind before, so I know that it's possible.
You didn't used to be a fascist, though.
No, but this isn't really about committed fascists.
This is about all the people who are misled into following fascist ideas because they
have no ideological defense against it.
Most Trump supporters are not mindless fascist zombies.
They're ordinary people who've gotten taken in by a specific set of fears and resentments.
And then they run into people like you, and you confirm everything that right-wing demagogues
have told them about the left.
You come across as violent, angry, irrational, politically correct, and humorless.
And no one wants to be around a person like that.
Oh, well I'm sorry.
Well, I guess I and all the other unlikable trash who don't think the prospect of genocide
is hilarious will just step out of your way so you can ride in on your golden underpants
and destroy fascism forever with memes and jokes.
Look, I know you think I'm frivolous and problematic, but maybe you'd change your
mind if you knew how many people I hear from that tell me I've made them seriously reconsider
their anti-SJW beliefs.
Maybe the reason you think the other side can't be persuaded is that you just suck
at talking to them and don't even make the effort.
The problem with the left is that you prefer to just cloister yourselves away in Mark Sengel's
reading groups and radical feminist safe spaces where you can argue amongst yourselves about
Trotsky and Luxembourg or Judith Butler and bell hooks, and you never make any actual
attempt to engage with the public who you claim to represent with your calls for violence.
Dude, you are literally spewing right-wing talking points right now.
Well, I'm spewing what the public thinks of you, something you refuse to acknowledge
or do anything to change.
You just have no idea how fucking privileged you have to be to even think that calm, rational
discourse is an option in the face of ideologies who want to deny the basic existence of marginalized
people.
Maybe if it was your life at stake, you'd be singing a different song.
That line of thinking only seems plausible to you because you've already made up your
mind that this is going to end in violence.
And that's a self-fulfilling prophecy.
You think that advocating violence makes you more radical than me and that it makes you
a better ally, but you don't know that.
You don't know how these hate groups are going to react when you try to attack and
humiliate them.
You think that this is an effective silencing tactic, but what if you're wrong?
Humiliation is a seed of terrorism, and what if instead of being silenced, these fascists
that you want to punch decide to retaliate?
And what if they don't retaliate against you?
What if instead they retaliate against the marginalized people you claim to be defending?
You don't get to pretend that you know how this is going to go down, because you don't.
You don't know either, and you can afford to have this delusional hope that fascists
will just be peacefully persuaded because you're a fucking white male.
You're a fucking white male.
You think that because you picked up the twisted ravings of some continental philosopher, you're
smart enough that you get to decide who lives and who dies.
Well guess what?
There are people all over the political spectrum who think that, and they're called terrorists.
When a Christ-fascist decides to bomb an abortion clinic, he thinks that he's stopping a genocide
against the most marginalized group of all, the sinless lives of the unborn.
But you don't leave any margin of error because you think you've got it all figured out.
Your only rebuttal is to keep reminding me that I'm a white male.
But I can say the same thing to you, you fucking white male.
You're just a privileged piece of shit who likes to wear a ski mask and spear anti-capitalist
slogans because you think it makes you look like a badass.
But it doesn't.
It just makes you look like a privileged fucking asshole.
Are you even a real punk?
Sexual orientation, gender expression, gender identity, disability, neurotypicality, and
body type means absolutely nothing to you.
You want to be white male, radical shit, piece of shit, you fucking white male, cis-privileged,
neurotypical white male, fucking asshole, piece of shit, you fucking cis white, fucking
white male shit.
And I will bash you, you gutter punk trash.
I'll bash you first, you bougie fuck.
I'll bash you good.
Fucking fascist, Nazi sympathizing piece of shit.
I'll fucking kill you for that.
I'll kill your face off.
I'll kill you too, you white male shit.
Who won?
Who's next?
Special thanks to Marcus Rantonius, Stove Panico, Roman Olyashev, Hatteradox, Raymond
Heinrich, Bottled Sky, NoNoNo, Vorone, Neil Tuck, Stealer of Souls, Aaron Ho, Romy Koya,
Steven LeVie, T-Shades, Robert Phillips, A Mysterious Benefactor, Ola Strandman, Phil,
Carter Kowchick, Jason Walter, Aris, Garrett Laffey, Nick Wolf, Kat Stas, J. Michael Comfort,
Michael C. Johnson, David The Benevolent Malevolence, Thea Raintree, Pofo, Sarek, and the other
patrons who sponsored my golf lessons in preparation for this video.
Patron J. Michael Comfort requests that I describe my ideal video game, so we're talking
full virtual reality here.
I'm chasing a dog down a long, dark hallway.
I'm naked, and I'm back in high school, but it's not really high school.
When I get to the end of the hallway, there are seven fat heifers and seven emaciated
heifers, and that's when the Pharaoh tells me how I'm going to die.
Thanks for watching!
