Hi, Peter and YouTube viewers. I'm Jonathan Jennings, Executive Director of Health and
Harmony, and today I'm in Indonesian Borneo with our partner, Asri, inside their incredible
hospital here in the rainforest. More on that video in a minute, so if you're a fan of this
channel, please stay tuned. First, to let you know that I've got a few videos in the pipeline,
part two of my look at free market solutions to climate change, of course, and a video looking
at this scientific explanation for what are too often called miracles. As part of my Science and
the Media series, I'll have a video showing how the line between fact and opinion is being blurred
in the media, especially when it comes to science, and a video on basic geology for those creationists
who thought my video, The Age of Our World Made Easy, was way too difficult. I don't get paid to
make these videos, and a lot of the meticulous fact-checking, citing of sources, and correcting
of errors takes time. The ads you see at the start of some of my videos have been forced on me by
YouTube, because it seems it's no longer possible to contest copyright claims in cases where I
legitimately use video clips for the purpose of rebuttal. YouTube has decided instead to simply
stick ads onto my videos and give the revenue to the copyright holder. I'm trying to fix that, but
my channel remains unmonetized. In lieu of payment and responding to the many offers of financial
support, I asked people to support a charity I came across in 2016 when I went on assignment
to Borneo. One of the stories I covered was here in the remote southwest corner of the island,
where a group of doctors and dentists had started a remarkable project that trades affordable medical
care for rainforest protection. Before these medical practitioners came along, local villagers
around this national park were entering the forest and cutting down trees to get money.
They didn't need the money for food. They didn't need it for shelter. The villagers even knew it
was doing harm to their community's environment and water supplies. They didn't want to do it.
What they needed the money for were medical emergencies. When your kids are sick, you'll
pretty much do anything to get them treated. So an American doctor and an Indonesian dentist listened
to their concerns and made an offer to each village. If your village pledges not to cut
down any trees, we'll slash our medical fees by 70%. The remaining 30%, you can pay in the form
of seedlings. A clinic was set up, villagers pledged their support and patients flooded in.
The seedlings they use as payment are then taken to the areas of the national park that have been
logged and replanted. The project receives carbon credits for this and the money they get from
carbon credits helps pay the salary of young doctors and dentists who come to work at the
clinic. But they also depend on charitable donations and they don't have any expensive
high-profile funding campaigns. So I was delighted that within days of me endorsing them,
thousands of dollars poured in from my subscribers. So adding to my thanks,
this is the charity's way of saying thank you to everyone and give you all a progress report.
Since pot holder 54 started featuring Health and Harmony's work about a year ago,
175 of you have donated about 20,000 US dollars to Health and Harmony. So today we want to give
you special insight into how we're using those donations here in Borneo to improve the lives of
people, the ecosystem, this incredible rain forest and the planet. Thank you very much.
One of the ways your donations is making a difference here in Borneo is through our
chainsaw buyback program. August, how many chainsaws have you bought so far in the one
year old program? And why are you buying these chainsaws? What is the purpose of your program?
Fantastic. And you have, you have managed to buy back 65 chainsaws.
How many chainsaws do you want to buy? 150 units.
So 150 chainsaws is the target. And the reason is there are about 150 loggers left inside of
Borneo Island National Park. So it's not enough, August knows, just to buy the chainsaw. August
and his team are then training, mentoring, accompanying the logger and the logger's wife
in the development of a small business.
So we're not only just buying the chainsaw from the loggers, but we also start an alternative
livelihood for them so that they do not go back to logging. And you said that there's a decrease
with 89% decrease in illegal logging households in Gunung Palung. Actually the 11% remaining,
every one of them actually wants to stop logging. So by doing this chainsaw buyback program,
we're actually helping them to actually do what they want to do for the forest.
And, you know, Peter and Peter, your followers, Auto54 viewers, thank you so much. We can't do
this without you. We, Peter, we respect your work so much. We're climate change is concerned. We're
all big fans of yours and we're thrilled that some of your followers are now supporting our work
and we look forward to staying in touch. Thank you so much. Thank you. What I love about this
project is that it ticks two boxes for me. Most charities that deal with people's urgent medical
needs do little for the environment. Most environmental charities do little for people's
urgent medical needs. This project does both. The other reason I love it is that it works.
As you've seen, the rate of deforestation has plunged and the health of the population is much
better. I was with a group of doctors when they responded to one call where they managed to save
the life of a young girl. Areas that were once cleared of trees are now reforested and camera
traps show that animals and birds are back. Thanks in part to your donations, they've gone from being
a small clinic to a small hospital and hope to introduce this model in other countries.
But right now, they need money for a new truck and have put out an urgent appeal.
It's costing them time and money to keep fixing the old one, so if you can help,
please click on the links in the video description and donate. There are also links to my BBC report
on the project. On days when I don't feel up to working on videos for my channel, it really is
an incentive to know that every video I produce helps this important work and your donations force
me to get on with it. So come on, give me a boot up the backside. Even people who hate this channel
will want to do that.
