So the stereotype is that it's just a bunch of trendy Tumblr teens going through a phase.
Well, I'm here to tell you that I'm a grown-ass adult, I drink taxes, I pay my scotch, and
I'm genderqueer.
Let's start at the beginning.
What does genderqueer even mean?
Well, hold on.
Why should I even have to explain this?
Can people not use Google?
I mean, surely in this day and age, people have access to a wealth of reliable information.
Well, let's give YouTube a try.
There must be some well-thought-out and researched explanations of it.
No, because then if you don't identify as either, I don't even know what you would
call him.
How can you not identify as either?
They is not a gender.
Nonbinary isn't nothing.
Nonbinary isn't a thing.
All these fake little genders, they aren't a thing.
What if they don't identify as a human?
You know what?
Okay.
Well, clearly the beginning is way too advanced a place to start.
We're gonna need to work our way up from pre-kindergarten here.
Alright, teacher's gonna need a refill on the juice though.
And a pint of raw ether.
Part negative one.
Pre-kindergarten.
Now I could try yet again to explain that gender is a social and psychological concept,
Well, sex is the term used by biologists to describe an organism's reproductive anatomy.
I can tell you that biological sex itself is a pretty broad and nebulous concept, describing
characteristics ranging from chromosomes to hormones to primary and secondary sexual anatomy,
none of which are strictly binary, and most of which can be altered medically.
And I could point out that the dogmatic insistence on an inflexible gender binary is nothing
more than a deliberate political gesture aimed at denying the existence of people who don't
strictly conform to conventional social roles.
But I know that by this point in the video, a bunch of free-thinking rationalists have
already posted a comment explaining that it's just a simple scientific fact that there are
only two genders.
And you know, you raise a good point.
Why don't we start out with a proper, scientific explanation of gender?
Doctor?
Thank you doctor, that was very informative.
I'm glad we cleared that up.
Part Zero.
Trans and Non-Binary Identities
You're watching this video in the 21st century, so you're presumably aware that transgender
people are a thing.
You've probably heard that certain people are born in the wrong body, and suffer intolerable
dysphoria, the only remedy for which is to undergo hormone replacement therapy and gender
reassignment surgery with the aim of passing as the gender they always knew they truly
felt they were.
It's a story that trans people often have to tell about themselves, in order to be taken
seriously by doctors, and to be understood by the general public.
And while it does describe some trans people's experience, it's by no means the only trans
experience, and it may not even be the most common.
Some trans people only discover their gender identity later in life, some don't experience
dysphoria so intensely, and others, called non-binary people who may or may not consider
themselves trans, identify with neither gender, with both, or with something in between.
Now there are lots of different ways to be non-binary, and there's a lot of terminology
that allows us to make those distinctions.
So for instance, the term genderqueer, which is the term I use for myself as of… now,
is a very broad term that's basically a synonym for non-binary.
More specific terms include agender, which describes people who don't feel they have
a gender at all, genderfluid, people whose gender identity varies over time, androgyne,
people in the middle of the male-female spectrum, and bigender, people who identify with both
ends of the spectrum.
Now if you're fairly new to this topic, and most people are, all of this probably
just sounds like a bunch of fucking made-up nonsense.
I mean, that's what I thought the first few times I heard about it too.
You may be thinking that these terms describe mental states that are impossible or delusional,
cue shitty unoriginal jokes about attack helicopters, or alternately feelings that are universal,
in which case you're probably wondering why we need special terms for feelings that
everyone has.
However, all these reactions are misunderstandings.
Forgivable, but wrong.
If you want to understand better, the best way is to listen more to the specific experiences
of a wide variety of non-binary people, keeping in mind that no two people's experiences
are the same.
So, at the risk of being self-indulgent, we may as well start with your humble narrator.
And besides, gazing deep into the troubled depths of another person's soul is usually
at least good for a laugh, because, well, other people's pain is funny.
Part 1.
My Shameful History of Lying to Myself and My Audience
In the past I've described myself as a cross-dresser, a transvestite, or a degenerate pervert, and
that characterization shows up a lot in my previous videos, which is now coming back
to haunt me.
I'm just an old-fashioned cross-dressing pervert.
Hello there boys and girls, my name is Shrumbly the Transvestite.
Four months ago, before I became the plucky, though dipso, maniacal cross-dresser you know
today, I don't identify as non-binary myself.
In fact, I identify as a mane, which is how Bluesman Muddy Waters pronounces the word
man.
I'm speaking as a mentally ill alcoholic transvestite.
So there are a few different reasons why I use that kind of language.
One is that I've always been kind of hesitant about claiming any kind of queer identity,
because I don't bang dudes, not yet anyway, and I don't own any rainbow flags, and most
of the people I've known who are non-binary are younger than me, usually assigned female
at birth, and they date women or each other, I don't know, it just seemed like the identity
wasn't for me.
Another reason is that I'm just kind of a self-loathing, self-denigrating person, and
I genuinely find it easier to just tell myself and other people that I'm a sexual deviant,
because it's a fun and breezy way to write the whole issue off, and it doesn't lead to
a whole difficult conversation about gender identity.
Also, YouTube is not a safe space, and it's prudent to pre-saturize yourself, to preemptively
say the things a bully might say, thereby robbing them of the fun.
Plus I really value humor, and you know, there's just nothing less funny than self-respect.
And there is a kind of authenticity in the self-denigration too.
In my past videos, I often evoke depictions of femme men as objects of ridicule or disgust,
for instance alluding to Silence of the Lambs or Rocky Horror.
And the truth is that I am kind of disgusted and horrified by myself a lot of the time.
Not proud of that, but it's a thing.
And I know this is probably not the inspiring and affirming message that you're hoping for,
but honestly I'm just not that inspiring of a person, so stop being inspired.
Anyway, I've now reached a point where I think I owe myself, and other nonbinary people,
a little bit better than I've been doing, and have been inspired by a lot of mostly
younger nonbinary people to drop some of this self-denigration and adopt a language that
I think actually affirms the way I feel inside.
Ugh, what is this channel coming to?
I'm talking about my feelings like a fucking queer.
What's next, not drinking myself into a stupor?
Oh shit, my defenses are lowered.
The bullies will make mean videos about me now, noooooo.
The term cross-dresser is very ill-defined.
Basically it refers to anyone who dresses as the opposite sex.
They could do it for fun, for theater, or as a sexual fetish, but essentially they'd
do it as a form of gender expression that's separate from their own gender identity.
Whereas, when I wear makeup or femme clothing, I feel like I'm expressing my own gender.
These aren't women's clothes.
I didn't steal them from a woman, they're mine.
And they're part of my gender expression.
So it's not accurate to call me a cross-dresser, because I'm not a man in women's clothes.
So what am I?
Am I a trans woman?
Well, that's a good question.
I have had mild dysphoria over the years that's sometimes bad enough that I have given serious
thought to transitioning.
I still hate my body hair and facial hair, and I spend a lot of time removing it.
All of it.
And I prefer femme or androgynous gender expression.
But here's the deal.
I'm six foot two, my shoulders are twice as wide as my waist, and I have this voice.
So passing?
It would take a lot of work.
Plus I'm pretty indifferent on the issue of breasts and genitals, and indifference
is not enough to justify surgery.
I have thought about HRT to get that sweet smooth estrogen skin and some alleged emotional
benefits, but you know, it involves a lot of doctors and therapists, and it's not really
my scene.
But it's more than just that.
I actually don't want to surrender some of my masculine attributes.
For instance, I kind of like my voice, and other people like it too.
People respect a masculine voice, and I'm not going to go passing on male privilege
just to be true to myself.
So I feel the term genderqueer best captures what I really am, namely some kind of freakish
hybrid.
Part Three.
Pronouns.
In some languages, like Chinese, there are no gendered pronouns, so in those languages
this wouldn't be an issue.
But English traditionally forces people to use either male or female pronouns.
A lot of nonbinary people choose to use they as a gender neutral pronoun.
Now my experience is especially true with agender people, who don't like the experience
of being gendered one way or another.
Now I'm more on the genderfluid or bigender side of nonbinary, though I don't use any
other term besides genderqueer because I just find these other terms are too specific.
But I don't experience a lack of gender so much as an excess of it, I've just got
too many fucking genders inside me, they're just filling me up deep inside.
So you can call me he or she.
Either is fine.
What I like the most is a rapid, disorienting alternation between the two, but I get that
that's a lot to ask for.
So, you know what, just call me whatever you want.
I'm making this real easy for you.
I'm basically un-misgenderable.
These are just unimportant labels you can just throw around and change whenever you
want.
They're like Pokemon.
Collect all the labels.
Until June.
Maybe I GODDAMN W-
Part 4.
Concluding unscientific postscript.
Oh I get it, you went to grad school, that's hilarious.
So let's end this video by doing a quick shoot-down of what I'm guessing are going
to be the most common objections to who I am.
Objection 1.
Why can't you just dress how you like without a special label, you goddamn snowflake?
Well as I've already said, being genderqueer is about more than just clothes.
It affects how I experience my own body, how I relate to other people, how the world
reacts to me, and even real personal shit.
Like who and how, I wanna BANG.
And when you tell genderqueer people that we shouldn't have a word for ourselves,
you're in effect asking us to drop the banner that allows us to understand ourselves, to
find each other, and to collectively demand recognition and understanding.
So telling us we shouldn't have a label basically amounts to asking us to shut up
and disappear.
Objection 2.
You're just doing this for attention.
Well, I do like attention, but the public aspect of this is really just the tip of a
psychological iceberg, so no, that's not correct.
Objection 3.
This makes you a bad feminist, because gender is a caste system, based on systemic subjugation
of women by men, and not just some identity that you can claim because of how you feel.
Well, can it be both?
Honestly this objection is more likely to come up for nonbinary assigned female and
birth people, since they can be accused of GENDER TREASY.
I'd suggest reading genderqueer feminist Laurie Penny's take on this.
Basically they identify as nonbinary, though also as a political woman, in recognition
of their need to defend female reproductive rights.
Objection 4.
It's just a simple scientific fact that there are only two genders.
And now we've come full circle.
Man, can't I just enjoy parading my new identity around for five minutes without having
to compose a goddamn philosophical excursus justifying myself?
Well, the answer is no.
No I can't.
So you know what, go ahead and post your shitty hotdog biology argument in the comments
section you fuckin' sis scum.
Mm.
I'm gonna enjoy that.
Special thanks to Aaron Ho, Arielle Elliott, Ben Palmer, Botseps, Carter Cowchick, David
the Benevolent Malevolence, Elias Jackson, Emanuel Muangie, Aris, Ewan, Feral Kimchi,
Garrett Laffey, Gorb, Hatteradox, J. Michael Comfort, Jason Walter, Jessica Hazzard-Wight,
Jonathan Messino, Julius Nyberg Oleson, Kat Stas, Christos Vanland, Ludmila Marasova,
Mon Silverplatz Toonstrom, Max, Michael C. Johnson, Nick Wolf, Niltak Sealer of Souls,
NoNoNo, Percy Steamboat, Pofo, Raymond Teimrich, Rob Hotz, Robert Phillips, Roman Oyashev,
Romy Koya, Sarek, Slimeball Baitlin, Thea Williams, Unknown Email, Vorone, Your Friendly
Neighborhood Anarchist, and the other enablers of my ongoing slide into effeminate Hebrew
decadence.
