Hi, I'm Harris Bomaguy and welcome to Serious Law Analysis.
It's fine, it's fine, it's fine.
Today we're looking at the truly radical Sonic the Hedgehog.
I remember commercials with people chanting Sonic's name in urban environments like he
was a revolutionary coming to rescue them from their plight, so I grew up assuming Sonic
was some kind of deep social commentary about fighting a revolution against the desolate
urban terror of Americana.
And after finally playing them, I can tell you that those commercials were spot on.
Sonic's really dark and serious if you stop to think about it for, like, 12 seconds.
I mean, let's begin with the name.
He's Sonic the Hedgehog.
Why V?
Because he's the last one.
What happened to all the other hedgehogs?
Well, maybe the genocide doomsday robots have something to do with it.
The world of Sonic is threatened by the evil Dr. Robotnik.
But that's in the inferior western dub for the gaijins out there.
In the original Japanese version I got on import, his name is far more thematically
relevant.
He's called Dr. Eggman.
Because, well, he looks a bit like an egg, don't he?
Robotneggman has almost completely taken over the world of the story with his machines,
leaving very few free animals remaining and doubtlessly killing many others.
Sonic is THE hedgehog because he's the last one.
Sonic has decided to identify with this status, making it his literal title.
It is a message of peace and justice to the free animals that remain, hiding in the cracks
of the world.
As long as any of them are left, even one, there is still hope.
But to his enemies, it is a reminder of what they have done, the things they have taken,
and of the sins that will be repaid.
For the forces of darkness, the last hedgehog is like an emissary from hell, an angel of
vengeance.
The level progression functions to represent the transition from the idyllic, prelapsarian
world to the man-made dystopia of Robotnik.
You slowly go from lush greens, rolling fields so free they have NATURALLY OCCURRING LOOP-DE-LOOPS
all the way to the Starlight Zone, a massive industrial superhighway for Robotnik's new
world, where the loop-de-loops are mechanistic and devoid of soul.
The game designers reused the loops just enough that by the time you get to the areas taken
over by Robotnik, they feel like a silly gimmick.
The Mona Lisa used to be a unique, beautiful spectacle that many would come to see for
miles around, hanging in... whatever museum it's in.
But now, you can Google it or get it on a postcard, and the images become replicated
so endlessly that it's meaningless, thus, also, to loop-de-loops.
In mass-producing the loopies, Robotnik has thereby ruined them and reduced their spectacle.
It sends a strong message that his world is technologically advanced, but feels fake and
uncanny.
A copy of something beautiful, reused so much that its value is lost.
Or you could say it just represents how SEGA were running out of ideas, which is a pretty
accurate reading, probably, but in the words of Roland Barthes,
FUCK OFF!
JUST FUCK OFF, ALRIGHT?
IT WORKS AS A METAPHOR, AND YOU CAN'T STOP ME!
At the end of each level, instead of taking over the castle of an inferior king and raising
the flag of his personal favorite in the style of a certain authoritarian monarchist war
Sonic simply graffitis over a sign with Robotnik's face on it, in an act of pure symbolic protest.
This is important characterization for Sonic, Sonic's devil-may-care attitude as a method
of dealing with the utmost depression he feels fighting a near-impossible battle as he copes
with the loss of his race.
Imagine having to get up every morning and fight a one-man revolution knowing that you'll
never have a hedgehog wife to hug, 2.5 hedgehog children to watch get on the bus to school,
or a white picket fence and fluffy hedgehog dog.
Hedge dog.
All those moments will be lost in time, like my train of thought once I thought of the
pun hedge dog.
What a terrifying fate to have to live with every day.
That's why Sonic goes into the fetal position every time he attacks.
Every moment of his battle is an attempt to stave off his existential angst.
Beneath that happy smiley and waggy finger lies a hearty serving of depressive personality
disorders.
More like Sonic the Herzog, am I right?
Death is certain.
After crossing the highways and miraculously not getting run over like most actual hedgehogs
I've seen on the motorway, Sonic enters the Scrap Brain Zone.
One giant literal machine, a nightmare of steam and steel.
The Scrap Brain Zone is Eggman's vision for the future, a world of grim uniformity
and pure order, everything in its rightful place but devoid of life or a soul.
This zone features numerous allusions to the Charlie Chaplin film Modern Times, specifically
the sequence where Chaplin's character falls onto the conveyor belt he works on and into
the machine within.
It spits him out as a bizarre, monstrous version of his former self, his mind warped by the
experience.
This was a metaphor for the effects of capitalism's work environments on its workers.
It literally altered them, made them more like machines themselves.
Chaplin would revisit this idea in The Great Dictator, in which the Nazi ideology metaphorically
turned people into machines with machine minds and machine hearts but not machine penises
because robots don't need to have sex, the poor bastards.
There, I've just taught you everything you need to know about film interpretation.
Now you can share my degree and my unpayable amounts of debt!
As a true successor to Chaplin, Sonic is fighting a battle against the evil robots in order
to free the good people trapped within them.
Inside the heart of your enemy is a good person who has lost their way.
But you can't make a freedom omelette without breaking a few Robotniks.
Robotnik leads Sonic into a trap and then violates the Geneva Convention by attempting
to kill a prisoner of war.
Oh, no.
Sonic falls into the garbage dump, a reappropriated piece of the labyrinth that runs throughout
the planet, covered in sewage, and the water's tinted purple by the pollution spewing from
the machines above.
Luckily, Robotnik left a spring here that leads directly into his office.
I'm not sure what this is a metaphor for, and the Sonic Wiki is too busy figuring out
Robotnik's canon-heightened weight to figure out the implications of the spring that causes
Sonic not to die in an otherwise inescapable sewer.
But don't worry, we've carefully chronicled that he's 282 pounds and his skin is beige.
Yes, that is a word that we use to describe colors of skin.
Yeah, yeah.
At last, it's over.
Robotnik's dead?
Okay, look, I was told this game was for children, right?
But I just helped the last of an extinct race gank a dictator by sabotaging his flying hoverchair
thing and watching as he crashes and burns and dies in the immolating flames of vengeance.
What kind of child is supposed to play this?
Officially an actual, literal murderer, Sonic returns home to a hero's welcome and leaps
towards the screen, thanking the player directly for their help, making you complicit in an
act of terror.
With Eggman dead, all that's left of civilization is a bunch of tiny animals who'll probably
need years of therapy to undo the horrors of being trapped in a machine and forced to
watch it destroy their entire family.
But if you got all the Chaos Emeralds, there's a couple more flowers.
Aw, that's nice.
Sonic the Hedgehog is a surprisingly morally complex story about the importance of extrajudicial
murder, and there's some deeply resonant themes going on in there about man's battle with
the machine.
You can't really rate depth on any kind of scale, because it's a kind of nebulous concept
to begin with, but if you could, I would give Sonic the Hedgehog a 7.5 out of 10.
On the depth scale that I just made up.
It asks a vital question of our society.
Is it right to unleash bloody war and death against authoritarianism?
And it answers, yes, definitely.
Fucking kill those guys.
You can say that Blair and Bush's invasion of Iraq had a needlessly high civilian death
toll and ignored the will of the international community and they deserved to be locked up,
and you'd be right, but you can't say they aren't 90s kids at heart.
By which I mean, if they had a single heart between them, they probably stole it from
a child.
If you have a suggestion for the next game you want me to do a deep lore analysis of,
please let me know in the comments, and I'll look for the one that's the one I already
wanted to do and pretend you picked it.
See you around!
Oh, hey, thanks for watching.
This week I'd like to thank...
Joseph Grieco
Two Armed Blues and Red Drapes
Zachariah Taylor
I Am Turnip
and Rick Hemi
Thanks so much, and...
Fucking eyes are killing me.
