You know, it's been pretty great over the last couple of years developing something of an audience, you know, a following and YouTube subscribers and
fans and people on Twitter who want to know what I have to say about stuff.
But to be honest, it's getting kind of annoying. I'm kind of sick of having them.
So I thought the best way to get rid of them would be to start a new YouTube video series
exploring the theory and philosophy and politics of various aspects of film that I feel aren't explored enough.
That should do the trick and along the way I might remind people of some of my more
contrarian opinions like the fact I think the Star Wars prequels are actually pretty good. Stuff like that. I just did it then, didn't I?
Welcome to Scanline.
If you're older than the age of 20 or have parents that don't throw things out,
then you probably have at least a couple of these things in an attic or a shed somewhere.
These are video home system cassette tapes, commonly known as VHS tapes. They entered use in the late
1970s and were a very popular way of watching films and TV shows in your own home anytime you wanted,
which for the time was a really novel and new concept.
With SelectaVision, you can go to the movies at your house!
I know this because I looked it up on the Wikipedia page when I was writing this script.
But let's get into what the world's largest ence,
Lie-clopedia, doesn't want you to know.
If you weren't in front of the TV when a show aired or hadn't gone to the cinema when a film was out, your primary
interaction with most pieces of modern entertainment and culture would have been through the medium of VHS.
Almost every piece of audio-visual art you consumed, no matter what it was made with, shot on, or how advanced the budget and special effects,
you saw it via the signal produced from the magnetic reels in these plastic boxes.
If you fell in love with a story, it was probably thanks to these tapes.
It's a pity, then, that they look like shit.
A standard PAL VHS recording consisted of roughly 320 horizontal lines and
576 vertical lines of visual information.
Worse, you wouldn't actually be getting your films at that resolution.
Since most films were produced in wide or super wide screen,
but VHS was for the 4x3 resolution of contemporary televisions,
you had a problem even showing a film.
You could crop out the sides of a film and move the screen around, what's called pan and scan,
which could totally ruin the story of films where multiple things were happening on different sides of the frame,
or you could scale the whole thing down and add black bars to the top and bottom,
creating what was called the letterbox effect.
On the pan and scan version of A New Hope, the opening text crawl doesn't fit the screen,
so you have to wait until it gets here before you can even possibly read it.
In the widescreen version, you can see the entire line of text as soon as it enters the frame,
but it's scaled down, so it's just as hard to read.
I always really liked the scene from Aliens where Burke is trying to be friendly with Ripley in hospital,
so he brings Jonesy in and sits backwards in his chair and spins playfully in it while the camera pulls in
and gets more intimate, so he can then tell her that she's been frozen for 57 years.
There's lots of good moments of subtle acting and characterization,
and I like the cinematography of this cool sci-fi room, and there's a cute cat in the frame, too.
The pan and scan version of this scene just barely manages to get both characters in the frame at once.
It completely removes a lot of Burke's body language as he tries to be nice while preparing to break the news to her,
and poor Jonesy's head is cut off.
Jonesy isn't in this film after the beginning.
Does Jonesy over here look happy with pan and scan?
I don't think he does, but I can't actually tell.
Even worse, because of the vile machinations of capitalism,
the first preferred solution by movie studios was pan and scan,
so they sold all the films like that,
and then, once they figured out that directors hated having their films recut to fit the new frame
and widescreen was basically objectively superior because it displayed the entire film,
they got to sell you the films all over again with the promise that this time it was better.
Now, for the first time on video,
you can savor the true experience of these blockbusters in their original format.
Widescreen.
My copy of the Aliens special edition—
sorry, the Aliens special edition?
Apparently I bought this tape from a xenomorph?
Opens with a commercial for the widescreen versions of Alien and Die Hard.
Fuckers.
And guess what? This version of Aliens is in pan and scan!
This is already the special edition of Aliens,
and now you're telling me I'm gonna have to buy it again when the widescreen special edition comes out?
20th Century Fox? More like 22nd Century Weyland-Yutani?
I'm sorry.
And that was it.
That was how people watched films.
They picked their poison between a tiny version of the original film
or a recut, reframed, gutted, despicable, cat-erasing version of the original,
and whichever one you picked, you got it in this flickery format.
You got this facsimile of the film that you wanted to see.
And that was how we consumed media.
For decades.
Some versions of the above-average fantasy film series Star Wars only ever widely existed on this format.
Many fans of Star Wars all over message boards and forums and my mentions
fell in love with the films because of tapes they rented or bought.
Because of this.
But wait a minute.
We can talk about specs and make fun of the video quality all day.
People still watched them, people still used them to record shows off the TV,
and people still shared and circulated those recordings.
Thanks to people wanting to see things and needing tape to do so,
homemade tapes are still the only way to find copies of shows that weren't available in any official format.
Many episodes of Mystery Science Theater didn't get a proper release for years after their initial air date,
and many still don't.
Prior to high-speed internet, the only way of accessing these old episodes
was through home recordings people happened to have made at the time the show aired.
You'd be amazed at what hoops folks would jump through to see a show they liked,
even on a low-res home tape recording.
And what if you were a fan of anime in the era prior to major home video releases of foreign animation?
Why, you would have to hope you knew a store with crazy import stuff with really poor fan translations
or hope someone had taped the shows that did make it over at the crazy times they turned up.
In retrospect, the format wasn't great,
but it was certainly good enough for audiences who wanted to watch something
in the comfort of their own homes whenever they wanted to,
and it was basically the first format that allowed people to do this.
It led to widespread consumption of material that would otherwise be forgotten or go unseen.
In the 70s and 80s, for the first time ever,
a regular person could have an archive of shows or films they enjoyed
without having to get a projector and go in search of film reels on eBay,
which would be really hard to do, considering that eBay didn't exist until 1995.
A person could learn about and consume elements of their culture
and develop an understanding of film so much more easily than the decades prior.
In fact, Quentin Tarantino and Kevin Smith worked in local video stores before becoming directors,
giving them an opportunity to further incubate their own passion for film
as well as share it directly with others
before going on to make some of the most influential films, for better or worse, of the 1990s.
The advent of VHS ushered in a new era of accessibility for film fans.
Tastes in film and appetites for film could be developed much more rapidly than ever before.
It marked the beginning in a radical and permanent shift in media consumption.
You were no longer reliant on what was playing in your local multiplex
or what old French films the weird art schools were projecting that month,
and you no longer had to adhere rigidly to TV schedules
or catch films or TV shows deigned worthy of being shown.
The shift was so radical that film companies panicked.
Then-MPAA head Jack Valenti, in an act of comical hyperbole,
said in a congressional hearing that the VCR is to the American film producer
and the American public as the Boston Strangler is to the woman home alone.
Universal Studios even sued Sony on the grounds of copyright infringement
over their Betamax video recording format.
Luckily, it was ruled that home recording devices operate under fair use,
and of course, once film companies realized how profitable home video could be, they backed off.
Many films started being made with their sales on the burgeoning
and seemingly never-endingly hungry VHS market in mind,
or even without the intent of ever being screened in a theater.
Some were barely even films.
They were instructional videos or Christmas-themed cat nightmares
or musical propaganda for a Christian cult that lived in the woods.
Lots of popular films did well on tape, but still others did hugely well on tape,
more so than you could expect from their cinematic release or critical reception.
The question here is why.
What is it about being available on VHS that made people suddenly become connoisseurs of horror or independent film?
Well, those reasons tend to get overlooked.
Let's look at some of them right now.
[♪ Music begins to fade out ♪
When making the film Jaws, which would come to be regarded as the first ever summer blockbuster,
Spielberg and co. discovered some problems with the shark prop,
a prop many would regard as quite important in a film about a shark that eats people.
The animatronics kept breaking down, bits kept falling off of it,
and most importantly, it kept sinking.
The fake shark had trouble floating in water.
Spielberg instead had to rely on using shots of almost everything but the shark
to demonstrate the horror of its presence,
show the aftermath, show explosions of blood in the distance, show the actor's reactions.
The result was a film where you barely ever get to see the animatronic shark,
but its presence is felt regardless.
The shark is rendered even scarier by not being shown in all its glory,
and its glory wasn't really all that much to see anyway.
It was a broken mechanical shark.
Toby Hooper's Texas Chainsaw Massacre is an incredibly startling and foundational film in the horror genre.
When James Fuhrman, a British censor and secretary of the BBFC at the time,
tried to cut the film to reduce its violent and nightmarishly oppressive atmosphere,
he found, to his own personal shock, that he couldn't.
There isn't all that much actual violence or blood in the film.
There are no single pieces or shots you could remove to diminish its effects.
Instead, it's a cumulative effect of all the properties of the entire film
in setting a tone and creating a mood without needing to show you anything in particular.
In the end, the Texas Chainsaw Massacre was refused a certification by the BBFC,
effectively banning it in the United Kingdom.
What these stories tell us is that even in visual mediums,
supposedly all about showing people things,
for achieving some effects, often less is more.
The human mind is incredibly good at scaring itself,
and sometimes not being shown what you're supposed to be scared of is the worst thing.
Confusion settles in, fear of what could be there, what could happen fills your head,
and your imagination, with its own particular fears,
gets to substitute those over whatever's actually there.
Texas Chainsaw Massacre did fantastically well when it was released in 1981,
allowing many Brits access to the film for the first time,
but many horror films did well on tape,
even if they relied much more on gore or were poorly cut,
and this is because of a particular form of this principle.
Let's think about VHS again.
That awful, tiny resolution, flickery screen,
even pure blackness is off-kilter.
If you walked into a room with this playing,
you might even think you're watching a scene of something hiding in darkness.
I bet you can almost make out a figure hidden there in all the noise.
You see where I'm going with this now, don't you?
Here's Alien, one of the best, most emotionally intense and scary films ever on VHS,
and through these tapes, Alien was flipping terrifying.
I remember being out of my mind scared by this low-res monstrosity,
and it wasn't just because of the great acting,
directing, editing, creature design, or music.
It was because in all the tensest and darkest moments,
you could never really quite be sure what you were looking at.
Abstract shapes in the background could almost look like something else.
The flickers and noise in the darkness
were easily confused for glimpses of the monster.
Even when you were sure nothing was there,
you could never really be sure.
When the monster actually turned up, it was almost a relief.
Like, at least now, you knew where the creature actually was.
-♪ You never let it go ♪
-♪ You never let it go ♪
Dallas?
In other words, a lower-resolution format
can increase the emotional impact of a scene.
Horror and suspense have the chance to strike people like it never had before.
No wonder films like this did well.
In some ways, modern high-resolution versions of these films
can't quite capture that particular magic.
Here's a scene from the Blu-ray version.
It looks great, but it's not as scary
because you can quite definitely see that nothing's there.
You know the character is alone in ways that you couldn't be certain of before.
Really good films actually put this principle into practice
within the medium itself.
For example, Alien and Aliens both have sequences
that prominently feature the use of cameras and video feeds
with a very poor signal.
Even if the higher-resolution version of the film
does diminish some of the horror elements,
these segments still hold up exactly like they always did
because the effects of viewing low-resolution video
are worked into the aesthetic of the film.
As a kid, David Cronenberg rotated his TV antenna
to pick up signals he wasn't supposed to access
late at night when there wasn't supposed to be anything on the air.
Well, what if the images that you pulled up
were really quite extreme, disturbing, possibly illegal,
and what would you think then?
Would you keep seeking out those channels
or would you call the police or what would you do?
How would you respond to that?
The fear and excitement he felt in anticipation of what he might see,
that fear of what was out there hidden in the static,
inspired him to make Videodrome,
so at least one great horror film
was conceived entirely because of this effect.
Horror and slasher films did really well on tape for this reason,
and many films became long-running series
that probably wouldn't ever have done so
without such successful post-cinema releases
on a format that arguably made them scarier.
Even boring or flat shots in mediocre films
can be made more tense by telling the audience
a killer is out to get the protagonists
and making it just a little bit tougher
to see where they could be hiding.
This also solves another problem.
Those of you who watched my, in retrospect,
woefully unfocused and unresearched video from 2016
about what makes action films work
will remember I made a comment
about how the CGI in Terminator 2 used to look better.
Well, here we are.
Thank you, Shannon, for helping me edit this video
and stop it taking another year.
Computer graphics and animation were largely lacking
in the 80s, 90s, and even the early 2000s.
Nothing really quite looked right,
things didn't feel like they were really there,
texture and displacement mapping wasn't up to snuff,
and you had smooth-looking weird stuff in your frame.
It wasn't great.
But even mediocre CGI can blend right in on tape.
This checkerboard man rising out of the floor
to murder a guy made me scared of my kitchen floor
going to the fridge at night as a hyperactive child.
It was vivid, like in my mind's eye,
Robert Patrick was gonna come out at any moment
and cut my entire body off.
Seeing the now easily available high-definition version
of this scene made me feel like an idiot.
My mind had done most of the work with the bad fidelity.
I think people who saw this scene in a theater
kind of had the scariest bits of the film ruined for them
because in the film prints shown in theaters,
this would have stuck out just as much.
But it wasn't just the relative badness of the image
that popularized certain things over others
in the medium of the video home system.
Another important facet was the fact that,
well, it was in your home.
Like I said before,
Texas Chainsaw Massacre was effectively not allowed
into cinemas when it was first released in the UK.
While some local councils allowed it
to be shown in their theaters,
the viewing experience would have been quite weird.
You'd be openly going out and paying to sit
and see something you knew was banned in other areas
for being violent and horrific.
It was like you were committing a crime
or were openly telling people you wanted to see that stuff
since you'd actively gone and sorted out.
But the uncensored 1981 video release did amazingly,
and it's quite clear why.
Instead of going out and sitting in a public space
for 90 minutes and then awkwardly shuffling out
trying not to make eye contact with the other people
who'd come to see this widely banned film,
you saw it with an audience of your choosing
in the privacy of your own home at a time that suited you.
There was a sense of being free of judgment.
The eyes of the outside world were no longer a factor
in your viewing experience.
This encouraged people to seek out films
they'd never go to see in public,
which, of course, includes pornography.
It's really not hard to see why home video
almost immediately killed porn theaters.
Kevin Smith has happily recounted
his time renting porn to customers,
saying,
and that having a frank conversation
with someone about their sex life
informed his work a great deal.
Home viewing also allowed for a less adult form of privacy,
a kind of comfortable intimacy with friends or family
that you can't get in a theater.
Getting together on the couch with a bowl of popcorn
and the glow of a television to watch a scary movie
is an oft-repeated familial ritual
in much the same way that gathering around a campfire
bathed in orange light to tell ghost stories
has been for generations.
There are also other factors.
You might have noticed that prior to the 90s,
television was shot very straightforwardly and blankly
with actors even in close-ups
framed very differently from films shot at the same time.
This is because televisual language
has to serve a different purpose from film language.
Movies are giant, projected way up and away from you,
staring down at you and occupying your entire view.
You are consumed by a film
and encouraged to think about it and its composition.
You don't do anything else in a cinema
but watch the film.
A television is a smaller screen,
often a good distance from you,
even in a kitchen where other noises
and events are distracting you.
You might even be reading a book
or talking to someone else while the TV is playing.
The early TV production style knew
that you weren't always going to be paying attention,
only pulling you in for the more dramatic
or important moments of a given episode,
usually using something like having music start to play.
The smaller screen also changes the way we relate
to the image and the people in it.
Television can be more human, friendlier.
Those little people on the screen
are having a nice chat about current events
and I feel somewhat included or informed.
A talk show blown up to 70 feet,
staring down at you in a darkened room
with surround sound blasting in your ears
would be overpowering to say the least.
And it turns out the aesthetic and design
of some films are predisposed to mesh beautifully
with the qualities of the television.
Nothing exemplifies this in practice
quite like Mallrats.
Mallrats was Kevin Smith's second film,
produced after the success of his first picture,
the small, self-funded indie hit, Clerks.
When Mallrats came out, no one really got it.
People who loved the low-budget, avant-garde,
doing-it-ourselves, grainy aesthetic of Clerks
hated the well-produced, overly slick feel.
People who cared about editing or cinematography
or good-looking shots got a kind of flat-looking film
with a bunch of boring wide shots
of multiple people just sort of talking about stuff.
Serious critics, into the pointed,
pop-culturally slanted insights of Clerks
and the honest thoughts of astray Gen Xers,
were treated to a bunch of wacky characters
farting about in a mall,
tricking people they didn't like
into making their hands smell like shit.
The film did terribly critically and at the box office.
It looked like Kevin Smith,
the indie darling behind Clerks,
had basically torched his career
with only his second film.
Luckily, a film would then come out
which would miraculously untorch his career.
That film was called Mallrats on Tape.
In 2001, on the subject of criticism of his films,
Smith said,
"'We should be able to make any movie we want,
stupid or not,
so long as it doesn't cost too much
and is reasonably guaranteed
to make its money back for our distributor.'
That, for the curious,
is why we're allowed to keep making movies.
Some cats--"
Oh, I hate how he talks.
Some cats, particularly the denizens
of internet movie chat boards,
can't figure out why we're allowed
to continue lensing flicks
when we never seem to grow as visual storytellers
or keep making, what's to them, the same movie.
The answer is that we've never lost anybody money.
I'll say that again.
We've never lost anybody money.
Granted, we came close with Rats,
but even that made a killing on video
and, more recently, DVD.
Despite box office troubles,
the same film no one went to see
and critics snubbed
was suddenly doing gangbusters,
making it an even more interesting sort of cult hit
than its predecessor,
and it's because of the aesthetic differences
of playing a film on a TV.
All of a sudden, the shot composition
isn't as important
because it's kind of far away from you
and you're doing something else
in the room while it plays
and the low quality of the format
means that even if the shots
were particularly good,
you wouldn't really have noticed anyway.
You aren't having the aimless banter
about nothing blasted at you
from speakers all around you
like it's the most important thing in the world
and you have to listen to every second.
It's playing nearby
and you're just kind of listening in
on these people talking free associatively
about their film opinions.
With this change in the viewing experience,
all of a sudden,
More Rats makes sense.
It becomes a funny little film
where the big scenes and funnier jokes
grab your attention
and the stuff that falls flat
or isn't so well-directed
doesn't matter so much
because it's easier to ignore.
Here's an IMDb review from 2003.
Brad C-2 from Auckland, New Zealand
jokingly says the film is best watched
with your eyes closed.
They criticize the look and feel of the film
and the hamminess of the overall plot
but they loved the dialogue
and they found it sharp and effervescent
and they say it's their favorite film
of Kevin Smith's.
I would say so far,
but honestly,
considering the films he made after 2003,
More Rats is probably still their favorite.
Kevin Smith films screened in a theater
on a big screen
are arguably missing the point.
The joy of these films
is in crowding around a small TV
at your friend's house
and watching little people on it
with no pretensions of grandiosity
being shitty to customers
and talking about their lives.
If you've sat down and watched More Rats
screened in a high resolution
and a cool retro revival screening
at your local college,
unsubscribe from my channel immediately, Kurt.
We talked about this.
I don't want to be your friend anymore.
Imagine all the films from across history
that were doomed to be misunderstood
by the theater-going audience
whose real destiny
was to be truly appreciated
on the small screen
where the viewer's relationship
with the work was completely different.
VHS was the first second chance
for those films,
and it created an appreciation
for these kinds of story
for televisual filmmaking.
You can see this trend happening in reverse
as televisions get bigger
and their picture becomes clearer
and their aspect ratio more film-like.
TV shows with a cinematic approach
like Breaking Bad,
Mad Men,
The Sopranos,
or Hannibal
are becoming more prominent and popular.
HBO calls itself home box office
because the home viewing experience
is finally akin enough to a theater
that these aesthetic changes
can really be appreciated.
People didn't just not care
about having television
that wasn't very nice-looking for 60 years.
Our relationship with the screen
simply changed in accordance
with its change in format
and size in our living rooms.
In the age of HD and TV on demand,
soap operas are waning in popularity
as the increased fidelity
and the typical viewer's filmic awareness
expose the show's production failings
and straightforwardness
more than the older ways could,
and the idea that you could be watching
Game of Thrones or House of Cards
at any time
suddenly makes neighbors
a bit less of a thing
that you might want to watch,
although people still watch it
all the time over here
and it's a little bit scary.
They make it in Australia,
but they make it for us
because we're the only people who watch it.
Why are we—
I'm a little bit worried
this might once again make it harder
for some films to be appreciated
because you even watch them
like a film at home,
but it's not like we're gonna just
stop making television shows,
so we're probably fine for now.
People will always want higher fidelity versions
of their favorite films.
Some people want a high-res version
of the original cuts of Star Wars
so badly that they've resorted
to making that version themselves
with different restorations
pulling from 35mm prints,
70mm prints,
a TV broadcast,
DVD special features,
and more all in the service
of recreating the films
they remember from way back when.
You can also see this battle happening
on the filmmaking end.
A filmmaker will always find
newer and better cameras on the market,
more bit depth,
better codecs,
1080p, 4K, 6K, 8K sensors,
all for footage that will often end up
getting seen on YouTube
at whatever resolution
their audience's computer monitors
or phone screens happen to be
with YouTube's compression algorithm
eradicating most of the specs
of their footage.
Looking good doesn't necessarily mean
having the best definition.
Telling a good story is the goal,
and if you get that wrong,
not even doing it on an Arri Alexa
can save you.
Obviously, shoot on the best equipment
you can get your hands on
and aim for a form of distribution
that best suits your work,
but I think the real challenge
is to make something that people
would fall in love with
even if they were watching it
on a crappy old tape in the 90s,
and in its own way,
whether we like it or not,
those tapes and the impact they had
will never leave us.
The format is in our history now,
and we remember it.
Nostalgia is real,
and it affects how we view old films
or perceive new films
that use it as a purposeful style.
Many films made in the vein
of 80s or 90s horror
get limited little VHS releases
because that's the style
they were courting in the first place.
Then there are the immensely popular
retro camcorder phone apps you can get
and the web skits that use the aesthetic
as part of a deeper throwback
to kitschy 90s children's programming.
Many new films exist only
in the form of tapes
or what are designed to look like
low-res rips of tapes
like the truly fascinating,
funny, and smart WNUF Halloween special
in order to channel the style
and further create a sense
of seeing a documented record
of a time period.
One film that combines all of this
with tapes' ability to make
cheap special effects look better
is the found footage film VHS,
an anthology of a bunch of short films
from various diegetic videotapes,
and its relative low-budget effects
are done real justice by the aesthetic.
The final segment, 10-31-98,
has a truly fascinating climactic sequence
where everything goes completely crazy nuts
and it's the most frighteningly real
a horror segment with what are actually
fairly rudimentary effects has ever felt
because the poor quality of the footage
makes it so much more believable.
If you filmed a window
actually sliding out of existence
and hands coming out of the walls
on a camera from this time period,
it would literally look exactly
the same as this footage,
and knowing that makes this sequence
infinitely punchier and more real-feeling
than the same effect would
in any modern horror film.
Growing up, I think the first favorite film
I ever had was Terry Gilliam's
Time Bandits.
I think it was the first film I ever saw
where seeing it I felt like
it was made for me.
It took my sense of alienation
from adult life and channeled it
into telling a story about
a vividly imaginative world
where the outsiders were the ones
who were truly free,
escaping from their parents,
invading armies, and even the will of God
in getting what they wanted out of life.
It made me feel good to not be
like everyone else,
like I was getting won over
on the world somehow.
This film helped make me who I am
and shape how I see everything,
and it did it on my dad's tiny television
in letterbox widescreen.
Obviously, for the sake of preservation
and film history,
a high-res official version
of handshooting first would be nice
to have.
We can chase higher and higher resolutions
as much as we want,
and we should.
I think they look great.
But the funny and kind of amazing thing is
millions of people only needed
a fifth of those lines of resolution
on a tiny screen
to fall in love with these films
and have them shape how they see the world.
For me, Time Bandits is
the objectively crappy version
I saw as a kid over and over
on a tiny widescreen tape
in the night when no one else was around,
feeling inspired by the sense of adventure
and briefly pausing
to go to the kitchen for a snack
and get scared by the floor.
All the Ks in the world
won't replicate the experience
I had as a kid.
It might even ruin it
by revealing all the obvious models
and matte paintings
and all the wood screws on the sets
for what they really were.
VHS was always a kind of bad format.
But in spite and because
of all its problems,
it caused a dramatic shift in pop culture
and in the taste and approaches to cinema
by viewing audiences
which is still felt to this very day
in the form of the cinema literacy
and particular feel and taste
it cultivated even by accident
with its style.
Oh no, look what happened by accident.
Oh no, look what happened by accident.
Oh no, look what happened by accident.
