Welcome to my very scientific race laboratory!
May the pure light of reason guide us!
We'll begin by measuring the superior dimensions of the caucasoid skull.
Tis evident to every scientific inquirer that nature hath seen fit to divide the creature
man into several distinct classes, whereof a manifest hierarchy subsists.
Lord Foppington, what are you doing in my lab?
I'm delineating the crania of the plurality of humankinds.
Well the 18th century called, they want their ideas back.
Well the anime convention called, they want their wig back.
Foppington!
Get out of my lab!
Before I slice you on the slab!
Nay!
Nay!
Nay!
Nay!
Nay!
Nay!
Nay!
Nay!
90% of you fucking people you have to talk to in this line of work…
Where's my pepsi?
Part One.
Race and Biology.
Because racist pseudoscience has often served as an alibi to genocide, slavery, eugenics,
discrimination, imperialism, medical abuse, and torture, many people are understandably
reluctant to broach the subject of biology and race.
Unfortunately, this kind of reluctance can look like a kind of politically correct avoidance
of the truth.
So let's just do away with all the reluctance, and begin by seeking out an answer to the
question, is there any biological reality to race, following the evidence wherever it
may lead.
Yay, Varily!
How did you get there?
Apparently this hallway is just one long circuit.
Well go away!
Now if we're being honest with ourselves, it's very difficult to approach a topic
as politically loaded as race without bringing a lot of baggage to the table.
But one way we might try to start from a more objective standpoint is to try a thought experiment
proposed by the YouTuber Concordance, namely, to imagine that an alien species landed on
Earth with our understanding of genetics, but without our knowledge of human social
and political history.
Would it occur to these alien scientists to divide human beings into the conventional
racial categories of black, white, Asian, and so on?
The answer to this question is a pretty definite no.
Let's take a look at why.
Geneticists measure human variation by comparing the frequency of genetic markers between different
populations.
It's pretty well known that around 85% of genetic variation is found within groups,
meaning that any two individuals from different populations are not likely to be much more
different than any two individuals from the same population.
And only around 6-10% of total variation is found between continental groups, what might
imprecisely be called races.
Now 6-10% is not zero, so you might think there is some justification for traditional
race categories based on continental origin.
However, for most of human history there has been continuous gene flow between local populations,
including across continental divides.
So there are no distinct boundaries separating continental populations from each other, and
the continental populations themselves are not homogenous.
This is evident when you look at, for instance, the distribution of Y-chromosome haplogroups
across the globe.
Categories like white, black, and Asian are therefore extremely arbitrary ways of dividing
up the genetic continuum.
In fact, there is no purely genetic justification for using, say, five race categories as opposed
to just one, or three hundred, or three million.
And because of global gene flow, there are no pure races, no matter how many categories
you choose, with the possible exception of some Pacific Islanders.
This is especially true in countries with recent global immigration like the US and
Brazil, where mixed European, African, and Amerindian ancestry is the norm.
These points are all made more eloquently, and in much more detail in a two-part video
by Concordance, which I highly recommend and have linked to in the description.
The upshot is that while geneticists and physical anthropologists can divide humans into populations
based on ancestry, there is no scientific reason for those divisions to track traditional
race categories.
This is because race is a pre-scientific folk taxonomy based on superficial phenotypic attributes
like hair and skin color, which are what biologists call polyphyletic, that is, derived from multiple
ancestral sources.
Compare, for instance, the dark skin of sub-saharan Africans with that of the genetically distant
Australian aborigines.
Race, as commonly understood, is therefore a social construct, but this is not to say
that there is no biological variation due to ancestry, only that traditional race categories
are not a good way to understand that variation.
Race realists like to use dog breeds as a counter example that's supposed to show
that everything I've said so far would imply that the distinction between Chihuahuas and
Great Danes is a social construct, which they take to be self-evidently absurd.
Now this is a bad analogy, since dog breeds are deeply inbred by human design, whereas
human populations are constantly mating outside the group.
However, the example does provide an interesting illustration of the relationship between social
constructs and biology.
Dog breeds are biologically real because of human social practices, so in a sense dog
breeds are biologically distinct, although they're not natural.
And this biology-nature distinction is a useful distinction to have, since racial injustice
can lead to conditions of poverty, malnutrition, environmental toxins, and so on that can then
have a biological effect.
So just like with gender, we shouldn't think of race as either biological or a social
construct.
It's both, and the relationship between biology and society is very complex.
And it involves causation in both directions.
So when I say race is a social construct, I'm not saying that biologists and anthropologists
shouldn't use categories like haplogroups and clines to describe human populations.
I'm simply saying that race is at best a very crude approximation of these categories.
And that crude approximation may well be useful in certain forensic and medical contexts,
but we should keep in mind that categories of race are based more on social and political
divisions than pure biology.
The racial categories used in the US census are the product of the political history of
the United States.
People who we'd consider white, black, and Hispanic here might be categorized totally
differently in Brazil, where different demographics and history have led to different race concepts.
This is all good and well, but when are we going to measure the skulls?
If I may quote a friend of mine, what is it with you people and skulls?
Is it so wrong to enjoy the touch of cold bones?
Part 2.
The Origin of the Idea of Race
Race realists like to talk about race as if it were a natural, intuitive concept believed
by everyone except a few politically correct postmodernists who have somehow deceived themselves
into not seeing the obvious.
It's therefore worth looking at the history of the concept of race to see if it's really
as universal as they say.
I'll start, like any true defender of Western civilization, with ancient Greeks.
I can find no evidence that the Greeks had anything like our concept of race, that is,
a division of human beings into different kinds with unique physical and psychological
attributes on the basis of ancestry.
This is not to say that the Greeks had no concept of ethnicity.
They definitely did, and a very ethnocentric one at that.
There were Greeks, and there were the obviously inferior barbarians, that is, non-Greeks.
But the Greeks defined themselves and distinguished themselves from say, the Persians or Egyptians
by their language and customs, not their biology or ancestry.
Aristotle's political philosophy included the idea of natural slaves, people who are
by nature the tools and property of the natural masters.
Now Greek slavery was not based on race, so there was no need to introduce a concept of
race to justify it.
Instead, Aristotle introduces a natural slave class to explain why slavery is totally natural
and fine, don't even worry about it, like, literally at all.
But clearly this is just a post hoc biological rationalization for the political hierarchy
of the time.
There are no slave Greeks or master Greeks, but it's a lot easier to see that when your
society is not founded on the idea of there being slave Greeks.
So with that in mind, it should not come as much of a surprise that Europeans first really
started talking about race in the 17th century, around the time that slavery and colonialism
were really kicking into gear.
My time has come!
Your time has gone.
Oh.
Arguably, the ideas of this goddamn bastard were first foreshadowed during the Spanish
Inquisition, when Christian converts became suspect, and Torquemada started inquiring
into defendants' ancestry using pure Christian bloodline as a criterion of religious authenticity.
Race first became the object of scientific study, with Francois Bernier's 1684 treatise
on the subject.
Until around the time of Charles Darwin, scientific racism was the only game in town, with naturalists,
anthropologists, and philosophers generally ranking the races, always with Caucasians
at the top, using such scientific criteria as dietary and sartorial customs, physical
beauty, and alleged sexual appetite.
Here's Carl Linnaeus, creator of Argenus' species nomenclature, on the subject of the
Asiaticus.
Yellow, melancholic, stiff.
Black hair, dark eyes.
Severe, haughty, greedy.
Covered with loose clothing, and regulated by opinions.
And here is Johann Friedrich Blumenbach on the term Caucasian, which he coined.
I have taken the name of this variety from Mt. Caucasus, both because its neighborhood,
and especially its southern slope, produces the most beautiful race of men, I mean the
Georgian, and because all physiological reasons converge to this, that in that region, if
anywhere, it seems we ought, with the greatest probability, to place the autochthonies of
mankind.
And here's Immanuel Kant, who never left his hometown.
The yellow Indians do have a meager talent.
The Negroes are far below them, and at the lowest point are a part of the American people.
Wow.
Very science.
Much objective.
So reason!
Basically what happened is that scientific insights, not much exceeding the drunken hunches
of any backwoods doofus, were used, along with some self-interested biblical hermeneutics,
to justify centuries of slavery and colonialism.
And the situation didn't improve much by the beginning of the last century, when crude
biological determinism was used to justify an American eugenics program of immigration
restriction, forced sterilization, and euthanasia that later inspired the Nazis.
Speaking of which, let's not forget about…
The Jews.
Hitler's deputy Rudolf Hess famously said that national socialism is nothing but applied
biology, and we could call this way of thinking biopolitics.
The idea is that the nation is the race, and the race is like an organism, so people
of other races—homosexuals, degenerates, criminals, race traitors, and so on—are
contaminants, vermin, or agents of infection.
It follows from this view that immigration should be banned, homosexuals should be euthanized
or cured—and this also applies to trans people, by the way—and degenerates and criminals
should be sterilized.
Now I know you're probably saying, Godwin's law!
You compare everyone you disagree with to Hitler and the Holocaust!
But look, the historical facts are what they are, and I understand that it's upsetting
to you that I would dare bring this up, but I don't respect your willful obliviousness
to historical precedent.
The historical record shows that race has always been a political concept, and an extremely
dangerous one at that.
So my view that race is not a valid biological concept is not a case of political correctness
invading biology.
In fact, it's exactly the opposite, an effort to liberate biology from an inherently political
concept that it doesn't need and that humanity is better without.
Yes, yes, but then how will we know to which of the four humors the races correspond?
Well gee, I guess we'll never know.
Part 3.
Race as a Social Construct and Individual Identity
Race may be a social construct, but it's not an illusion.
It's real in the way that money is real, it affects the way we all experience the world,
and real people are privileged and disadvantaged because of it.
So even if our goal is a society where race doesn't exist, we can't get there by denying
the political reality of race and racial injustice.
Color blindness, in other words, is not the answer.
However, as society becomes more multiracial and as there are more mixed race people around,
it does get harder and harder to say what the nature of race as a social construct is.
The ambiguity of race was highlighted by the case of Rachel Dolezal, a white woman who
fabricated her biography and lived for a decade passing as a black woman.
Now I'm not convinced there's a legitimate analogy between race and gender when it comes
to psychological self-identification, so I don't think Rachel Dolezal is a black.
But I do think her story raises complicated questions about what makes a person black
or white.
Is it the way people perceive you, or a certain cultural upbringing?
Or maybe having certain racial experiences, like being disadvantaged or oppressed in certain
ways?
Because Rachel Dolezal lied about so many of her experiences, she's maybe not a great
case study.
But suppose, hypothetically, it turned out that one of her parents was black after all.
Or suppose she really were the victim of hate crimes, or was discriminated against due to
her perceived blackness, or suppose she was raised by black parents.
I don't think there is a definite answer to whether a person in those circumstances
is black or white, but I do think that asking the question reveals the inherent ambiguity
of the concept of race.
Alright doc, I can't stand it anymore, when are we going to measure these bones?
Oh my god, shut up about the fucking bones.
Well can I at least do blackface?
Absolutely not.
Well why not?
Are you two politically correct?
Well I did this fucking shit and people still haven't forgiven me.
Alright, so hear me out.
No.
It's ironic blackface, like the joke is that it's racist.
You are an actual lord of shit, you know that?
Well what if I only do half of my face?
Still no.
That's not racist is it?
No it's still racist.
One dot of black paint isn't racist.
Shut up.
The center of my face has to be painted black before it's racist.
Look you wanna measure some bones?
Why don't we start with yours?
I like to grind the dust of racist bones.
I like to mix it with my milk.
It's how I stay so white.
It's how I stay so...
Pure.
I love it.
Special thanks to Aaron Hoe, Alejandro Herrera, Alexis Goldusky, Angelina Beastmode, Annoyance,
Ariel Elliott, Art Souls, Buttceps, Carter Kalchick, Chris Tristero, ComputerPupper,
David the Benevolent Lovelance, Elias Jackson, Emmanuel, Aris, Ewan, Felipe Villasenor, Feral
Kimchi, Forwer, Garrett Lathy, Get Donked On, Heterodox, Isaac Jorgensen, J. Michael
Sanford, Jason Walter, Jennifer German, Jessica Hazzard-White, Joel Casas, Jonas Arendtorp,
Jonathan Yosino, Julius Niebuhr-Golossen, Christos van Lund, Ludmila Marashova, Manfred
Ghostpuncher, Max, Michael C. Johnson, Mickey Rau, Nick Wolf, Neil Takstealer of Souls,
NoNoNo, Percy Steamboat, Pofo, Rational Disconnect, Raymond Heinrich, Brie Mansell, Rob Hotz,
Robert Phillips, Roman Ulyashev, Romy Koya, Sally Ferguson, Sarek, SpaceKitty, Thea Williams,
Unknown Email, Ladlina Kostiskou, Vorone, Wesley Loving, Your Friendly Neighborhood
Anarchist, and the other enablers of postmodern cultural Marxist brainwashing.
