Well, here's to a successful first week.
Cheers!
To a successful-ish launch.
Honestly, it did way better than I thought it would.
At least in terms of rankings.
I think the highest we ever got was like number seven under children's science fiction.
And then in the Kindle Paranormal Romance we got up to like number six or so.
And we were number two under hot new releases for Paranormal Romance.
So that was also kind of a surprise because we only sold a few hundred copies.
There was one person in the comments, however, who had a moment of, guys, no, because we
outranked Wrinkle in Time.
And I think you could see their heartbreak over their comment.
Like, no, guys, no.
Those rankings have nothing to do with the classicness of it, with the overall popularity.
It's really just what's selling that day.
What sold that day.
So today's drink of the week is the Tennessee Hussie, which is a Brut Champagne and a Tennessee
Honey.
You have to find like a super dry champagne because this shit is really sweet.
It's really, really sweet.
Basically it's just whiskey with honey in it.
It's good, though.
It's just redonkulously sweet.
We learned a lot about Poe's Law this week.
The very day it got released, we ended up on like Fark and Reddit.
There's a Lovecraft Reddit, turns out.
People took what was on the tin for face value.
Well, it's funny because people would like sneak into those threads and be like, guys,
I think this is a joke.
And someone else would jump in and be like, no, man, it's real.
I think it was either from the Fark thread or the Reddit thread.
They came in to troll Sarah's website.
Poor Sarah.
Jean-Francois Quaggy said, stop ruining Lovecraft's work.
Why not have some imagination for a change?
I'm honestly surprised.
I thought we wouldn't really get any of the pro-Lovecraft people.
I thought they'd kind of look at it and go, ha, and walk away.
Lovecraft is serious business.
Vivi Wannabe responded, she's not ruining it, she's expanding it.
To which my personal favorite, Kaka Pizza, took it a step further, like, no, it's rape.
Here we go.
Yes, raping, says Kaka Pizza.
Hey, Kaka Pizza, wanna know what's rape?
Rape.
Rape.
As far as knowledge of the expanded mythos, I think we naysayers are fine, thank you bunch.
And I'm all for funny Cthulhu paraphernalia.
And this is rape.
Yeah, rape.
Rape, rape, rape, rape, rape, period.
Rape.
You see, all right, here's the thing.
You keep saying that word, I don't think that word means what you think it means.
He's like, guys, we gotta stop applying rape to, like, nostalgic sci-fi shit.
To things you don't like.
Bumblebee peeing on John Turturro is not rape.
And Ninja Turtles is not rape.
And young adult Cthulhu romance is not rape.
But thank you, Kaka Pizza, you gave us a good laugh.
On the other end of the, I think, the offended young adult fans, we have Goodreads.
The funny thing is, Goodreads, uh, I'm tapping out.
Goodreads has developed something of a subculture over the last few years.
And honestly, I mean, like, I kind of knew about this in, like, a sort of knowing about
it distantly sort of way.
Well, that's why we made the character of Sarah, because we were aware of this sort
of rising of authors actually engaging and even bullying detractors on sites like Goodreads.
Yeah.
Sarah, just so we're clear, is, does not exist, and she is a parody.
Sarah herself is a parody of the thin-skinned, insecure Colleen Houcks and Becca Fitzpatricks
and other authors that get in fights with their negative reviewers.
So one person left a, um, a very negative review of the mere idea of the book, taking
it at face value.
But it was also so, like, over-the-top and ridiculous when we first read it, I think
we were thinking...
I thought she was one of ours.
Yeah.
Oopsie.
Well, she mentioned, well, the other thing was, like, I should've known because she mentioned
sock puppets.
Guys, don't make sock puppets.
Come on.
I, I didn't, I didn't honestly think that people would do that.
So she thought they were all Sarah.
And so of course Sarah responded in her thin-skinned, insecure way, but in hindsight we probably
should've tweeted it because I thought, you know, people would look at it and go, teehee,
look at what Sarah said and not engage.
Yeah, which, alright, moving forward.
Write your reviews about it, be it negative or positive.
Try to be as honest about the book as you can be.
Don't harass people.
Really don't harass people.
Well, the other thing is, like, people have a very different, uh, idea of what harassment
entails.
Like, so many people jumped in on this girl and tried to explain to her what was going
on and she was just like, no, I'm a social justice crusader, I'm blocking everyone.
That was fascinating.
She, she, she was kind of painting herself as like this Edward Snowden whistleblower
who was like over here, like, letting, giving the truth to the masses and it was just like,
oh, our cover's blown, you guys.
I trust that most people who bought the book bought it knowing that it was a parody and
had a good laugh.
Some people have left reviews saying that it was not a good parody and that's fine.
Yeah.
Some people have left reviews being like, this was actually a better written book than
I thought it would be.
I, I had that feeling when we were writing it.
We were just like, this is way too cohesive for the things we're parodying.
Yes, it's a ridiculous parody, but we did want it to have like an engaging story and
characters that you like and make sense and have a voice.
Well, I think then it comes down to what's the difference between parody and satire?
Well, that's, it's almost like the next point just found itself.
Let's talk about that.
In a way, I feel like this whole project kind of has elements of both.
Um, I feel like Sarah is a satire, but in the way that Stephen Colbert is, but, uh,
the book itself is definitely a parody.
Satire is pretend, is pretending to be something it's not in order to make a comment on something
else like society usually, whereas parody is just an over the top, stupidification of
the product.
So basically satire is about society, parody is about the product.
What parody there is in it, even though it's silly and a ridiculous premise, we're remarkably
subtle about it.
When you look at things like Board of the Rings, well, that's, that's why I tend not
to like feature length parodies and why I thought like we did need to be a stealth parody
in order for the damn thing to be readable.
Because like I've read Board of the Rings and no joke, it was one of the worst things
I've ever read.
It was so awful.
Like it was just like poop and fart jokes and there's sort of that thing with the National
Lampoon style of parody that it's great for like short form SNL stuff, but like man, like
long form, you're just like, no.
Yeah.
Well, like it's like that parody of Game of Thrones.
The success of the show is linked to its two creative consultants, author George RR Martin
I'm on set to ensure that the show honors the spirit of my books.
And Adam Friedberg, a 13 year old boy, I make sure there are lots of boobs in the show.
And that was a three minute skit, but could you imagine a feature length of that?
No, it would be unbearable.
Spaceballs and Young Frankenstein, I think are good examples of bearable parodies.
They have lovable and memorable characters on top of basically existing to play up genre
tropes and poke fun at them.
In a way, in our own wicked way, we do kind of love the Young Adult Paranormal Romance
thing because it wouldn't engage us so much.
There wasn't something about it that just kind of captured our fancy.
Yeah.
But I think it was Mel Brooks who said like, you make a parody because you love it.
Yeah.
To an extent.
My attitude on Young Adult is complicated in the same way that my attitude on Transformers
is complicated.
It's complicated.
It's complicated.
It's like my Facebook status.
It's complicated with Young Adult Paranormal Romance.
And Transformers.
And also Transformers.
It's polyamorous.
Mermaid Transformers.
Mermaid Transformers.
What the fuck?
You know what's real sad is like I went for like my whole life not knowing about that
and if I did know about it, my brain went, nope, nope, and just blocked it.
No, I did that when Bumblebee peed on a guy.
My brain went, nope, and I just forgot about it.
It was like the truck nuts in the second movie.
See, this is what happens when I start talking about Transformers.
Now we're Transformers.
Back to YA Paranormal Romance.
We as a culture have become so obsessed with it because it's become so popular, but at
the same time, it's not like there's nothing redeemable about that sort of first love and
adding this magical element into it.
We really did get caught up in the story, like especially the secondary characters.
To me, I think that is sort of the worst thing about this book as a reading experience is
that the main character is so awful.
They made her really awful.
And I'm having the same problem with American Gods, which I'm just now getting around to
reading and I'll read like 50 pages like, I hate you, Shadow.
I'm going to read another book and I'll like blow through another book, go back to American
Gods.
Fuck this.
Another book.
Blow through that one.
Fuck.
I'm not a book.
Some American Gods.
So if that is parody, it's something that plays up the tropes, either lovingly or not,
Board of the Rings.
What is satire?
When I think satire, I always think back to Jonathan Swift and it's a clashing example.
Yeah, that's what they teach in high school English because it's so obvious and it's so
over the top.
And yet people really did legitimately think he was serious.
Yeah.
So I feel like it kind of in ways is both depending on which attitude you take.
That said, I don't feel like this book is really trying to make a comment on society,
nor is the project at this point because it's so obviously a parody.
To me anyway, because we created Sarah, I think we are making some sort of loving jive
at our modern ages and the internet ages.
I feel no loving anything towards these authors.
Okay.
If you are an author that gets in goodreads fights with your detractors, you suck.
Like straight up, stop it.
Like what the fuck are you doing?
You're hurting America.
Writing fiction is such a personal thing.
And so whenever people go after little tiny books about how fucking awful they are, then
I feel kind of like, guys, come on, you know?
But then there are the Fifty Shades of Grey's where it's like, hey, you just romanticized
like abuse.
And to have an author then go, lol, nope, my fantasy, lol, fly off to the sun.
I mean, that's what drives me crazy.
That's what's so fascinating about these types is this sort of just like, no, whenever they
hear criticism and that they need to correct people, people like EL James and Colleen Houck
and that there's just so such insecurity and such a thin skin that they just need to
know and like react against these people who aren't getting it.
People who interact with their fan base or with humanity in general as a creator of art,
who act that way, like it bothers me.
Well, here's the other thing.
Writing fiction is hard.
You put something of yourself into it.
Something that you yourself probably may not even consciously perceive, you know, like
my kinky shit or my daddy issues or whatever.
But the thing is, world, when you put anything out into a public sphere, you are opening
it to criticism.
And you are not exempt from it just because it's your fantasy or someone doesn't get it.
Or especially if they're trying to call you out on being like a romanticizing abuse, EL
James.
I think the thing that has most been revealed to me in this whole thing, having our baby
now released to the world at large, is how quickly and almost foolishly people get passionate
about things.
And that's not a terrible thing, though.
Well, I mean, it is kind of funny that, you know, it's like we created Sarah as a parody
of drama and then actual drama happened.
It was like, no, we didn't want that.
What have we done?
Oh, God, we've created a monster.
Edward Snowden has to do the right thing, man.
Gotta blow that whistle.
People may not like the truth.
Because it's a scam.
Because it's a scam.
But the thing is, for the most part, we've been having so much fun with what people are
doing.
There's Awoken fanfic now, which is the greatest.
Oh, my God, yes.
People live blogging the book has been hilarious.
Oh, you have made my workday so much more pleasurable.
Thank you.
Special shout out to Theole, whose live blog has been hilarious.
And we've like read out loud at parties.
So in the meantime, keep leaving reviews.
Of course, if you still want it on Kindle or paperback, you can do it down there.
Yeah.
And of course, we have great fun with all of them.
Be honest as you like.
We hope you find it funny.
We want it to be funny.
Yeah.
But by all means, be honest if you feel like it's a, someone once put it as a really good
second draft, which I'm fine with.
Oh, my God.
It's actually almost like, that's a go team.
Considering we're consolidating the writing of eight authors, like, hey, I'll take it.
After the, you know, we keep tracking this and see where it goes.
Sequel.
Yeah.
