So, the internet has lost its mind.
I include myself in that description.
I cannot open my YouTube homepage without a flood of angry Game of Thrones hot takes
and here I am, a month late to the conversation, just adding to that deluge and I'm sorry.
But you know, sometimes you've got some feelings and you just, you just gotta monetize them.
How did this cultural landmark, one of the most popular television shows in history,
critical darling and commercial success, a show that unequivocally changed the way television
was made, end as such a trash fire?
It's not like there was a change in the creative heads.
The showrunners were always the same, cast was almost uniformly the same.
So like, what the hell?
So this is yet another autopsy on what I think the hell happened.
And for the most part, I'm going to keep this to a discussion of the TV show.
We could get into discussions of author intentionality and adaptation, but I'm going to stop you
right there because I don't care.
This is an adaptation, therefore every creative decision should stand on its own, regardless
of whether it was in the books or not, or how you think George R.R. Martin is going
to go with it, whatever.
Because the books aren't done yet.
The show is.
So what you're whinging about?
I'm not whinging.
Your lips are moving and you're complaining about something.
That's whinging.
The most common talking point in the wake of the finale of Game of Thrones is that the
writing was… bad.
So with a popular thing always comes controversy, and Game of Thrones was no exception.
From day one we had hot takes about its portrayal of gender, about its portrayal of race, sexual
violence, exploitation, you name it.
Your mileage may vary on how much you're willing to put up with.
I was willing to roll with the problematic elements, not ignore them, but accept them.
But the critique of sexism and racism in media is not, not relevant to the discussion
of bad writing.
When you default to stereotyping, you're being lazy and thoughtless, which generally
makes for bad, or at least uninteresting, writing.
Dwarves have mad eyes.
For more on that, see the Bride episode.
Fairy lives don't matter today.
But at the same time, no piece of media is ever going to be ideologically pure, and it's
unrealistic to expect that.
Critics and fans alike have been discussing the problematic elements of Game of Thrones
since the day it debuted.
For some, they wore too much, and these people stopped watching.
I know a lot of these people.
For others, people like me, they digested it, yep, Sansa's getting raped and Theon
has to watch, but we accepted it and continued to watch because hey, surely this is leading
up to something riveting.
Or at least poignant.
It's not like critique of Game of Thrones is anything new, but it's different now.
Before it was about, like, how the thing is problematic, or when is it okay to have a
rape scene.
Now the discussion is more about, like, structure and planting and payoff and character development
and screenwriting and audience expectations and subverting expectations.
Sir Bronn of the Blackwater, Lord of Highgarden, Lord Paramount of the Reach and Master of
Coin.
But there's more to it than that.
In fan culture in general, especially for a long-running, beloved series like Game of
Thrones, we may eventually run into the...
Which might make you defend a thing way longer than you should have.
After all, you've watched and re-watched all of the seasons multiple times, you have
a dedicated twitter account just for live-tweeting Game of Thrones.
Yeah, okay, everyone can fast-travel all of a sudden when distance was a huge tactical
consideration in early seasons, but whatever, it's fine.
I'm fine, I'm sure this is because the story needs to head somewhere important.
Season 7 wasn't bad, they were just building up to something cool, give them a chance.
What I hear really often, probably even more often than I don't watch the show, is I stopped
watching the show, usually around season 5 when it really started to go off the rails.
But either way, don't worry, we are going to do a quick recap for the benefit of the
people who stopped watching the show, who never watched the show, and probably the people
who everyone needs a quick recap anyway.
And by quick, I mean about half the runtime of this video.
And I'm also about to steal a lot of jokes from Gay of Thrones, so sorry Jonathan Van
Ness, you're just too difficult not to steal from.
Strap in!
Season 1, basically a murder mystery surrounding the line of succession for the Iron Throne
after the last Hand of the King dies.
Hand of the King is basically the Grand Vizier, let's say.
She says Jon Arryn was murdered.
Episode 1 ends with a child witnessing some incest, and Prince Charming from Shrek 2,
aka Brother Dee, pushing the child out of a window, presumably to kill him, but he fails.
The King asks Sean Bean to be the new Hand of the King after the old one dies mysteriously,
so he goes to King's Landing with his two daughters.
He engages daughter Sansa to the evil Prince, she's thrilled.
But eventually Sean Bean discovers that the Prince is the incest bastard of Lena Headey
and Brother Dee, and not the legitimate son of the King, Bobby B.
But Bobby B dies, Sean Bean gets beheaded, and a big ol' war begins.
Sean Bean's people fighting for independence, and everyone else fighting for the throne.
And also Lord Life Alert over here is like, hey, I'm in the war too, but nobody cares.
Daughter Sansa becomes a captive, other daughter Arya escaped, and is angry.
Meanwhile, across the sea, the deposed King's daughter Daenerys, um, gets married off to
this guy and raped.
But then her husband learns to respect her, and it's fine, but oh no, he's dead.
But then she gets some dragons, and up north Jon Snow discovers some ice zombies.
And two, big ol' war for succession, Bobby B has two brothers, plus inbred bastard King,
plus Sean Bean's son, and also Lord of the no one cares islands is like, hey, I'm in
the war too, but nobody cares.
Ending in a big battle led by Peter Dinklage, evil inbred bastard King side wins, but Charles
Dance is the real power behind the throne, and also the best character in television
history, do not at me, he just is.
Meanwhile, Sean Bean's people are winning the war for independence, and Sean Bean Jr.
is supposed to marry Lord Lifelord's daughter, but then he marries Una Chaplin instead, fun
fact, that's Charlie Chaplin's great-granddaughter.
Up north, more zombies.
Season three, no one is grateful to Peter Dinklage for his role in the big battle, aw,
well he gets to be secretary of the treasury anyway, Arya's still angry, Sansa is no longer
evil inbred bastard King's fiance, Natalie Dormer is, Arya is kidnapped by this guy he's
called the Hound, don't worry, he's great, Brother Dee had a genuinely wonderful redemption
arc with Captain Phasma, seriously, it's some of the best television in all of television.
Sean Bean Jr.'s campaign is no longer going so well, they plan to wed a different Lord
to Lord Lifelord's daughter that Sean Bean Jr. was supposed to marry, but instead the
wedding ends in a massacre and the whole family is slaughtered, this is the infamous Red Wedding,
the war for northern independence is over.
Across the sea, Daenerys has been using those dragons to liberate a bunch of slaves, season
ends with her big white savior moment, season four, evil inbred bastard King is poisoned
at his own wedding, Peter Dinklage is framed for it, Sansa escapes to the north with the
help of totally trustworthy, you know what, I'm just going to steal another thing from
Gay of Thrones vintage Alan Cumming, doe-eyed inbred bastard King is now king, Natalie Dormer
is engaged to him, after a rigged trial, Tyrion demands a trial by combat, which goes well
for him until it doesn't, his brother Dee sneaks him out of the city, but not before
he murders Charles Dance, and also his girlfriend, but don't worry, he's still totally sympathetic.
Arya's travel companion the Hound loses in battle to Captain Phasma, she escapes him
and decides to leave the country to go to assassin school, up north there's a battle
between these people, who are trying to escape the ice zombies, and the border patrol Jon
Snow is a part of, his love interest dies, Daenerys conquers another slave city and decides
to rule it instead of coming to Westeros, child who was pushed out of the window in
season 1, he's like learning omniscient mind powers from Max von Saito.
Season 5 Tyrion with the help of Lord Doctor Evil is
running around Essos trying to find Daenerys, Cersei tries to exploit rising religious extremism
in the capital, which oops really backfires on her once they find out about all those
inbred bastard kings, there's a really dumb subplot involving this guy's people that
gets dropped the following season, it's awful, Bobby B's brother, the guy with the
strongest claim to the throne, burns his daughter to death, because he thinks that will give
him some fire magic to win a battle, it doesn't, Arya goes to ninja school, decides it isn't
for her and leaves, Daenerys is bad at ruling a city whose culture she does not understand,
her dragons are unruly, she's bad at everything, eventually there's a pro-slave rebellion,
she almost gets killed, but don't worry her main dragon saves her, his name is Drogon,
Jon Snow tries to help the free folk they were battling in the previous season because
it turns out those ice zombies are raising an army of regular zombies, and the more dead
bodies they have the bigger their army gets, his border patrol brothers stab him to death
because they don't like that he's helping the foreigners, he's dead, Sansa.
You've known Sansa since she was a girl, now watch her become a woman.
So uh, here is where we pretty much completely run out of books to adapt.
Season 6!
Jon Snow gets resurrected by the woman who talked Bobby B's brother into burning his
daughter alive, Daenerys is captured by the people she married into in season 1 and is
forced into captivity with the other Kull widows, but manages to wow them all by murdering
all of their kings with fire, but you know, she herself is immune to being set on fire,
which means she's the Kull now because that's how the society works so she reunites with
her dragons and manages to do one-two punch of liberating Meereen from the pro-slave rebellion.
Lord of the No One Cares Island gets thrown off a bridge by Hot Topic Pirate, aka the
worst character in the show, or possibly any show, Arya murders the entire house of Lord
Life Alert, and then feeds them to him, and then kills Lord Life Alert, Tyrion becomes
Hand of the Queen for some goddamn reason, I don't know, probably because he's played
by Peter Dinklage, then it's off to Westeros for Dany and her entourage, with the help
of Lord No One Cares Island's daughter and the Iron Fleet, which I haven't mentioned
yet, but they're about to get real frustrating, Sansa escapes and reunites with Jon Snow,
they reclaim Winterfell for the Starks, and feed to his dogs, it is an empowering feminist
moment.
Oh, and Cersei blows up the Vatican, wipes out the religious extremists and her adversaries
in the aristocracy, and parks herself at the balcony drinking wine, where she will stay
for the next two seasons.
But not before her last child kills himself.
SEASON SEVEN!
Okay, it's about to get really dumb.
It's a pretty song, I've never heard it before.
It's a new one.
Whee!
Daenerys and Jon Snow have a meet-cute.
I mean no offense, Your Grace, but I don't know you.
In the time since he's met me, he's refused to call me queen, he's refused to bow, and
now he's calling me a child.
I believe he's calling all of his children.
Figure of speech.
But they spend most of the season faffing around, whether Jon Snow will bend the knee,
on behalf of the North, after he helps Dany take the throne, debate about whether or not
to fight the White Walkers or go after Cersei first.
Daenerys battles the Lannisters a bit, Jon Snow and Daenerys f**k.
And then, okay, this is where it gets really dumb.
Alright, so everyone is like, hey, the big existential threat is the ice zombies.
How do we convince Cersei to stop fighting us so we can deal with the existential zombie
threat?
I know!
Let's send the Magnificent Seven north of the Wall to get a sample zombie.
So they do that, and it is the dumbest thing, but you, like me, are willing to give these
showrunners the benefit of the doubt, like, oh boy, you know, they're just doing this
dumb thing to get to the good stuff.
So they get stuck, and Bobby B's bastard son has to go do chariots of fire and send a note
to Daenerys to please come save us, which she does, risking her life to do so, but loses
a goddamn dragon in the process.
But whatever, she saves their asses.
And it is here, only after she risked her life and lost a goddamn dragon, that Jon is
like, okay, I will bend the knee, and Daenerys is like, okay, well, I already ate some humble
pie to save you, so I hope I am worthy of this, because I know this is a big deal, not
only for you, but, you know, for humanity to, you know, survive.
So then they fast travel to King's Landing and show Cersei the zombie, and they're like,
trust us, I know this is just one, but there's a lot of these, and Cersei's like, okay, truce,
and also I will send soldiers to help you fight the ice zombies.
But guess what?
She's lying!
You pledged to our forces to fight our coming in.
I say whatever I need to say to ensure the survival of our house.
And it is only then that Brother Dee is like, you know, I think I've had enough of your
conniving and evil and blowing up St. Peter's Basilica.
So this whole stupid subplot was not only a total waste of time, but they lost their
resurrection expert and gave the Night King a goddamn dragon in the process.
Go team.
Season 8!
Episode 1, everyone arrives at Winterfell, Cersei fucks Hot Topic pirate, the North is
racist, I guess.
Episode 2, zombies are coming, oh no, a lot of dialogue, basically reads like a big send-off
to all our favorite characters.
This will go down in history as the last decent episode of Game of Thrones, and also a massive
waste of time that gets totally shat upon later.
Oh, it also turns out that Jon Snow is not a bastard, but is in fact the rightful heir
to the throne.
My real name is Aegon Targaryen.
And also Daenerys' nephew, Wheee.
Episode 3, the big battle, the biggest battle, which almost all of the major characters survive.
And it is resolved when Arya stabs the main ice zombie, the Night King, with a special
blade, and then they do the fantasy trope thing of, you know, oh you killed the main
one, the Eye of Sauron is exploded so all of the orcs are dead now.
So yeah.
So that's the end of that, I guess.
No more ice zombies, really.
And we still have three episodes to go, and they're all 90 minutes each, oh good.
Episode 4, I Want to Die, time to head south and conquer Cersei, only on the way Hot Topic
Pirate shoots one of those indestructible dragons out of the sky with two million to
one shots from a mile away, which the dragons did not see.
Also somehow they captured Daenerys' gal pal, but no one else.
And guess what happens to her?
Yep.
Yep.
Also everyone kind of wants to do some treason on Daenerys for some reason, even though she
has by this point done nothing wrong.
If you consider it, the best ruler might be someone who doesn't want to rule.
We're discussing treason.
She's like a literal war hero, but Lord Doctor Evil is like, hmm, I don't know, I was supporting
her for like half of the entire show, but I got a hunch.
He's temperate and measured.
He's a man, which makes him more appealing to the lords of Westeros.
Episode 5, Kill Me, time to invade King's Landing, but not before burning Lord Doctor
Evil alive, because he's doing some treason.
The invasion succeeds, and it is absurdly one-sided and easy.
Turns out it does not matter at all that Daenerys lost half her forces or two of her dragons.
They invade the city in like 90 seconds.
And Tyrion's like, okay, when they ring the bells.
Ringing the bells.
Ring all the bells.
Ring the bells.
Hear the bells ring.
If the city surrenders, they will ring the bells and raise the gates.
I've always hated the bells.
They ring for horror.
A dead king, a city under siege.
If they're welcoming then you king.
I've never known bells to mean surrender.
If the city surrenders, they will ring the bells and raise the gates.
And then the bells ring and then Daenerys is like, no, I think, um, I'm going to go
do some war crimes.
And then like does a 9-11 times a hundred.
9-11 times a hundred.
Jesus.
That's...
Yes.
9-11 times a hundred.
Episode 6.
I long for death.
Triumph of the will shots all around.
Dany does her big fascism speech in scary foreign language and Nazi clothes.
The only non-white characters left in the show are the people who are really into it.
Tyrion's like, well, the madness has taken her.
We should probably put her down like Old Yeller.
And Jon Snow, who has done nothing all season but say, she's my queen, is like, no.
But then he goes and puts her down like Old Yeller.
Her one surviving dragon in a fit of rage burns not the person responsible for her murder,
but the symbolism.
And then he flies away with her corpse.
There is a trial in which the prisoner is allowed to nominate the new king, which no
one has discussed in the intervening months, apparently.
And who has a better story than Bran the Broken?
And yeah, the omniscient guy ends up on the throne and we get our John Hughes ending where
the Kinslayer and the Queenslayer just gets to go up north to Snowchella.
And all of these people whose god-queen has been murdered by this guy are like, well,
okay, I guess we'll agree to disagree.
And birthright monarchy is over, we have aristocratic oligarchy now instead.
Which is totally better.
The end.
So the ending was, um, it was bad.
It was quite bad.
But the ending was, in fairness, foreshadowed by other things being bad.
So it's not original of me to suggest that Game of Thrones took a sharp dive in quality
after season 4.
Some have blamed that on the show running out of source material, others have said as
much as the lack of interesting new characters, as all your faves were rapidly dying off,
which they weren't really in the books, whatever, I'm not here for that.
So what really changed?
Well, as I see it, there were two main storytelling component shifts.
One, that characters, let's take for instance Tyrion, who are defined by their intelligence
and ability to read the writing on the wall as far as Westerosi politics go,
My brother has his sword, and I have my mind, and a mind needs books like a sword needs
a whetstone.
suddenly had to take a whole bunch of stupid pills in order for the plot to get where it
needed to be.
And, number two, where in earlier seasons the plot was highly motivated by the social
trends of its fictional world, see the rise in religious extremism in season 5, the show
completely opted to ignore them in later seasons because it was simply inconvenient to the
plot.
Writer and researcher Zeynep Tufekci wrote a blog entry for Scientific American in which
she posited that this shift lie in the fact that the first few seasons were dominated
by sociologically driven storytelling, i.e. characters responding to a broad physical
and social institution, and that the latter seasons were driven by psychologically driven
storytelling, as in driven by the characters themselves, and therefore were more in line
with typical Hollywood storytelling.
I half agree with this.
The show's plot and point of view has always been extremely character driven, and always
extremely in line with Hollywood storytelling in that way.
The plot is driven by a few powerful people trying to figure out how best to manipulate
the society they lived in to their will.
When you play the game of thrones you win, or you die.
But I will agree that earlier seasons had the main characters making decisions less
based on personal whims and more in response to social trends, be it war, politics, religion,
and so on.
But really where things fall apart can be traced to one underlying main problem.
The showrunners had a destination in mind, and a set length of time to get there, meaning
they had to bend the character actions and world around the destination, rather than
allowing the characters and the world to reach the destination organically.
But the problem is, the characters they wrote kind of developed a life of their own, and
the characters in the show are not the same characters as the characters in the books.
Some see this clusterfuck as a problem of having a planned ending, although I personally
think you always need to have a good idea of where you're going in a series.
It's just that whenever you're working towards an ending, you kind of have to accept
that you might not get there the way you think you will, or in how long you think it will
take.
Right, buddy?
These things take time to write.
They're 1,500 pages long.
Some people can't even read them.
So before we really get into where we got, first let's talk about how we got here.
So stop me if you've heard this about Game of Thrones.
It's fantasy for people who don't like fantasy.
This was a popular selling point in the press back in the show's first few seasons, and
given the different landscape of the time, it's easy to see why.
Fantasy did well in film, television not so much.
When Game of Thrones debuted, prestige Soprano-style television that happened to also be genre
fiction was mostly, um, non-existent and or relegated to cable networks like SyFy, then
called the SyFy Channel.
It was the kind of thing that had a cult following on LiveJournal, not the kind of thing your
cousin Brian, who still tailgates at Penn State despite having graduated a decade ago,
would have any interest in discussing at the family reunion.
This dichotomy is, of course, complete nonsense.
There isn't anything appreciably non-fantasy about A Song of Ice and Fire that sets it
apart from the rest of the genre, but try telling cousin Brian that in 2010.
But only nerds appreciate that kind of nuance.
Lightning bolt!
Lightning bolt!
So, in order for a fantasy show to be worth the time and interest of non-genre fans on
a premium subscription channel, it can't just be regular fantasy.
With its, you know, wizards of great import and prophecies and heroes, what we're destined…
no.
It had to be hot fantasy that fucks.
The word-of-mouth narrative around the show quickly devolved into a message of, see how
Game of Thrones subverts fantasy expectations?
Because we've never read a fantasy book besides Lord of the Rings before?
See, this isn't your wide-eyed Brotherhood of Man, too-much-hugging-and-forehead-kissing
fantasy for nerds.
This is hardcore, violent, darkly cynical, titty-besotted fantasy.
Hot fantasy that fucks.
They're gods for Bessie.
And they're tits.
Game of Thrones also came about at the dawn of what has become to be known as the golden
age of television.
We could go on for a while as to the validity of this label, but for now, let's just take
for granted that, yeah, sure, this is the golden age of television.
Here we are.
This is it.
We...
What does that mean?
Broadly, the golden age of television is marked by a period of serialized prestige drama that
debatably began with The Sopranos and has now become an oversaturated market with not
only cable and premium channels, i.e. HBO and Showtime, but with streaming venues themselves
less encumbered with budgetary constraints like Amazon and Netflix, not only piggybacking
off of the success of premium cable, but sometimes outshining it.
We've hit a period of oversaturation that is referred to by some as peak TV.
And while that might lead to some truly excellent, polished, high-budget art that we've genuinely
never seen before, the push for networks is more to become the next big thing.
So when you're writing your series, novel, comic, TV, whatever, there are broadly two
ways you can go about it.
You know the ending, or you don't.
Breaking Bad is widely considered to have one of the best, most coherent, most satisfying
finales in all of prestige television.
According to creator Vince Gilligan,
it was designed to be closed-ended and not have even the possibility of going on indefinitely.
It's really incumbent upon us to bring it to as satisfying a conclusion as possible,
and the only way we'll have a chance at doing that is to know exactly when it is that
we're going to end, and also to have that ending not be too far off in the future.
On the other side of the coin, you have shows like Dexter and Lost, where the showrunners
had no endgame plan, and Lost is perhaps the most emblematic of the problem of a concept
with no endgame in mind.
J.J. Abrams is infamous for his mystery box approach to storytelling.
That presenting an audience with a tantalizing mystery, let's say about someone's mysterious
parentage,
For my family, they'll be back.
is a great way to keep them engaged, whether you know the solution to that mystery or not.
But planned finales can also create problems.
Box writer Emily Vanderwerf wrote about the danger of planned finales in the wake of Game
of Thrones.
She points to Breaking Bad as an example of a show that found a way to thread the needle
of planned finale with the organic storytelling that comes with television.
And after Gilligan and company meticulously plotted season 2, they more or less plotted
the rest of the show on the fly.
According to Vanderwerf, this is the paradox of TV.
You'd think that having a satisfying ending would require having a rock-solid plan to
get to that ending, but the opposite is often true, because the more you know about how
a story is going to play out in the macro, the more the micro just becomes a series of
items checked off a list.
Knowing the goal you are working towards is great, but only if you leave room for the
fact that characters and their relationships can change during the life of a show, even
if you totally know where the show is going.
So with Game of Thrones, that was a benefit and a handicap.
The showrunners knew where they were going, even if the actors didn't.
Jon's eyes open as well, already filling with tears.
For a moment neither moves, as if moving will make this real.
We see Jon with his hands still on the hilt of the dagger he just lodged in Dany's heart.
Her strength leaves her and she collapses to the marble.
He keeps her in his arms and she falls, and then raises his sword to strike, but something
is hurtling toward him out of the dark.
Oh, my lord.
Best of my men.
Breaker of chains and mother of dragons.
Our queen's nature is fire and blood.
Standing before the Iron Throne, Dany steps forward and kids plunge their knives into him.
He takes more punishment than Hodor took at the door, than Beric took in the grave.
And in broad strokes, I don't doubt that where D&D ended up was where Martin intended to go.
However, they create big problems in that taking shortcuts, making character changes,
and cutting certain characters and subplots all together, they've written a different
story to the one that Martin wrote.
Their characters are different characters than the ones Martin was writing.
Cersei is different, Daenerys is different, Tyrion is way different.
Damn you, Peter Dinklage, for just being so ding-dang-dong charismatic and handsome.
You're talking to a king!
And now I've struck a king.
Did my hand fall from my wrist?
I will remember you.
But we can't make him the bad guy.
Who cares if he strangled his lover in a jealous rage?
Or in self-defense, as it is in the show.
I guess that's what we're going with.
I'm sorry.
Yeah, see, the way this arc played out was a red flag.
This scene makes no sense, given how both Tyrion and Shae evolved away from their characterization
in the book.
I am yours, and you are mine.
While still getting their book ending.
So the showrunners were given a destination, but when the show they wrote and the characters
they created kind of went in directions that did not work with that predetermined destination,
or at least were going to have to take a very different way to get there, who cares, let's
do it anyway.
So no discussion about prestige television is complete without a talk about the Sopranos,
and this will spoil how The Sopranos ends, so fair warning.
You know, I still have people asking me, what the hell was that last episode?
The Sopranos begin the era of prestige television drama in earnest.
Like Game of Thrones, it was a massive critical darling and commercial success out of the
gate.
So, like Game of Thrones, when The Sopranos ended after six seasons, there was a lot of
build-up for how it would end.
Would one of Tony's many enemies gun him down?
Would he slaughter all of his enemies in some pyrrhic victory?
How would his relationship with Dr. Melfi play out?
Would he walk away from the life altogether?
We get answers to some of these questions.
Dr. Melfi cuts him off when she realizes Tony is a lost cause, and Tony does not walk away
from the life.
The final scene in the show takes place at a diner where Tony is scheduled to meet his
family for a regular dinner.
Carmella shows up.
His daughter has some difficulty parking.
Shit.
But then we notice that several of the other patrons in the diner are acting kind of suspicious
and giving Tony the side-eye.
Journey's don't-stop-believing increases in volume to the point that it's almost overwhelming.
There's this really dissonant, dark, comedic tone.
The scene is building and building in tension, and then...
It cuts to black.
And that is the end of The Sopranos.
And as with Game of Thrones twelve years later, people lost their shit.
It made a lot of people angry.
Creator David Chase knew how it was going to end for a while, saying,
"...no one was trying to be audacious, honest to God.
We did what we thought we had to do.
No one was trying to blow people's minds or thinking, wow, this will piss them off.
People get the impression that you're trying to fuck with them, and it's not true."
I actually really like the ending of The Sopranos.
I think it works both thematically and dramatically.
Tony might have died in the moment it cut to black, or he may just have had a boring dinner.
But as long as he's stuck in that life, he'll always be living on a knife's edge.
Would I have done anything differently with the ending of the show?
I don't think so.
But The Sopranos set the stage for memorable endings.
And another lesson was learned here.
The wrong one, in my opinion.
A memorable, even controversial ending...
Don't stop!
...is the same as a good one.
Fan service also merits discussion here,
because fans in recent years have had a much more active role in shaping media.
Typically, the longer a thing goes, the more fan service gets jammed in to keep people engaged.
And not all fan service is bad.
One of the positive changes from the books is the fight between Brienne and the Hound in season four.
You're the wrong one to watch over her.
And that's what you're doing?
Watching over her?
Aye, that's what I'm doing.
In the book, the Hound goes down from blood poisoning from a stupid wound he gets in a bar fight.
But in the show, you have two characters you both care about fighting over Arya to the death?
Like, I want them both to be—
No! No, my children!
I'm screaming!
So...
Cleganebowl.
Let the dogs out!
Hoot! Hoot! Hoot! Hoot!
I'm not a knight.
You're a talker.
Listening to talkers...
makes me thirsty.
Thirsty. Thirsty.
At best, Cleganebowl is slash was a fan theory that combined both book and TV lore,
a lot of internet meme culture,
and the burning desire to see this giant man kick the ass of this other giant man
in a revenge fight so epic that it would rock the foundations of Westeros itself.
You know who's coming for you.
You've always known.
Get hyped.
See, the Hound looks the way he does and is afraid of fire
because his brother, the Mountain, shoved his face into a fire when they were kids.
And ever since then, he's wanted him some revenge for that and some other things.
All about that revenge. Just really, really hates that mountain that rides. Hates him.
My brother's alive.
Hates him, the Hound.
We come across my brother.
Maybe we can both cross a name off a list.
Wants revenge.
And while, yeah, the meme itself was a lot of fun and we got hype and everything,
as a dramatic plot point, it's, um, it's really fucking dumb.
One, not only is the Mountain functionally dead by this point, like,
Oberyn Martell killed him and what we have now is basically just a mindless zombie
that does whatever Cersei says.
But two, the books make it pretty clear that Sandor is finally at peace with himself
and his need for revenge.
If the gods are real, why haven't they punished me?
They have.
Revenge being mistaken for justice is a big thing in the books and we will get to that later.
His arc wasn't about getting revenge, it was about moving past that.
In the show, I...
You can still help a lot more than you've harmed Clegane.
It's not too late for you.
Never too late to stop robbing people, to stop killing people.
Start helping people.
Never too late to come back.
You know who's coming for you.
You've always known.
Who is forcing you to do this?
He's, he's like a zombie.
He's dead, he's a shell, he's a zombie.
Cleganebowl happens while Daenerys is doing some war crimes
and King's Landing is burning.
They're fighting for nothing.
The Hound has long since moved on.
This has not been his motivation for a while.
Gregor is an empty zombie shell and the world is ending outside
and everyone here is about to die anyway, so who cares?
The Hound isn't even fighting for Arya.
He's not protecting anyone.
And look at me.
Look at me!
You want to be like me?
You two rode a thousand miles on horseback together
and you only now decide to have this conversation?
Go home, girl.
The fire will get her.
The one who lit the thrackey.
Also, Arya murdered all of House Lord Life Alert
and baked them into pies and fed them to their father.
I'm pretty sure her revenge quest is shot the moon
in comparison to yours, sir.
I'm not sir.
So Cleganebowl had no reason to exist
other than the concept becoming memetic on a god-tier level.
Yeah, that's you.
That's what you've always been.
How do you like me now?
Fucking die!
Fan service also comes with the double-edged sword
of, in this case, the show's self-imposed burden
of needing to be smarter than the fans,
which becomes harder and harder in a world
with massive subreddits dedicated to theorizing about the thing
in incredible detail.
So somewhere along the line, subverting expectations
stopped being a thing one did because it benefited the story
and more a thing one did because, well...
We hoped to kind of avoid the expected.
She seemed like the best candidate
provided we weren't thinking about her in that moment.
This isn't necessarily unique to Game of Thrones.
Westworld creator and showrunner Jonathan Nolan
admitted that an episode from season two had to be rewritten
after Reddit fans guessed a major upcoming twist.
Reddit has already figured out the third episode twist,
said Nolan, so we're changing that right now.
It's annoying sometimes when people guess the twists
and then blog about it.
You can't complain when people are that engaged, he added.
It's very gratifying, but stop doing it, please.
I can't help but think that fans should be allowed
to, like, gather in groups online and theorize
and have fun without networks, like, watching in
and going, oh no, they figured us out.
We better go change the show
because we only exist to outsmart Reddit.
Like, you don't have to be unexpected
for the sake of being unexpected,
but when your show is kind of known for that...
We hope to kind of avoid the expected.
These people have guessed the secret
that I'm going to reveal in book six.
People have already guessed that here
and book two is just out.
You really have two choices there.
You can ignore it and proceed with your plan,
despite the fact that some people know where you're going,
or you can get all panicky and say,
oh my God, they figured it out.
I can't let that be.
I'll have to change it.
I'll have to go in a different direction.
And I think some writers do that,
and I think that's always a mistake.
You know, if you've planned your book
that the butler did it,
and then you read on the internet
someone has figured out that the butler did it,
and you suddenly change in midstream
and it was the chambermaid who did it,
then you screw up the whole book.
So I'm not saying that David Benioff and D.B. Weiss
were writing the show with the intention
of both indulging in fan service
while also avoiding correct fan theories.
I'm just saying this culture inevitably influences
and infiltrates the writing of a show
that was already handicapping itself
by limiting its runtime for...
no reason,
except that you're really over the show
that made you famous,
and you got a Star War you need to go ruin.
I mean, make.
Why is it ending?
Uh, I don't know.
Ask Dave and Dan when they come through.
We could have gone to 11, 12, 13 seasons,
but, uh, they...
I guess they wanted a life.
The journalist who reported that quote from Benioff
diplomatically described his reaction to it as
frustrated.
In hindsight, that's a bit of an understatement,
seeing as any thematic coherence in the series fell apart
after Martin stopped being actively involved
in the production after...
wouldn't you know?
Season four.
What are the odds?
But to me, it betrays a certain lack of curiosity
on the part of Benioff and Weiss,
and it makes me wonder
why are they even dedicating their lives to storytelling
if they are so uninterested in themes?
Especially given that they adapted a book
that was so heavy with them.
What unites people?
Armies?
Gold?
Stories.
There's nothing in the world more powerful than a good story.
Yeah, so this series functionally ends with
these two chuckle fucks like
fetishizing storytellers as the most important people
to ever exist.
But yeah, themes are for 8th grade book reports.
We want to avoid the expected
because that means it's bad, okay?
And who has a better story
than Bran the Broken?
So you might be asking,
did you really just spend 45 minutes whinging?
I'm not whinging!
Your lips are moving and you're complaining about something.
That's whinging.
And you didn't even get into any specifics?
Yep.
Uh, yeah.
We got about 10,000 words worth of our whinging.
That's whinging.
In our Google Doc before we realized that
this was, this is gonna be two-parter.
Yep, it's two-parter.
Sorry.
And this part is the sponsored part.
Are you interested in thematic coherence?
Do you have a book report you need to write?
Are you in the 8th grade?
Don't have time to read A Song of Ice and Fire?
Well, why not listen to it using Audible?
Audible members now get more than ever before.
Members choose three titles every month,
one audiobook plus two Audible originals
that you can't hear anywhere else.
Members also have unlimited access to more than
a hundred audio-guided fitness and meditation programs.
I love those.
And you might be like,
Game of Thrones is 33 hours long!
And that's a lot.
To which I say, the first book I recommended for Audible
was Disney War, and that sucker is three hours longer.
And it's also 33% shorter if you listen to it
at 1.5x speed like I do.
Right now, I'm listening to the Hugo nominees
for Best Novel.
If you didn't hear, Angelina and I are actually
nominated for a Hugo this year for our Hobbit duology.
Hey, I might get to meet George R. R. Martin
at his loser's party.
Oh, no.
I'm going to let best-selling author John Green
deliver the URL information for how you could start
listening with a 30-day trial,
and your first audiobook is free.
You can go to audible.com slash Lindsay Ellis.
That's audible.com slash Lindsay Ellis
to get your first audiobook free,
or, or, or, or text Lindsay Ellis to 500-500.
That's Lindsay with an A, Ellis with an E and an I,
two L's and an S, to 500-500,
and get your first audiobook free.
I'm glad they let me keep the same URL.
Who let the dogs out?
Who let the dogs out?
Who let the dogs out?
I'm not a knight.
You're a talker.
Listening to talkers
makes me thirsty.
Thirsty.
Thirsty.
Thirsty.
Thirsty.
You're a talker.
