Here's a little murder mystery. One morning police find the body of a murdered woman,
her head bashed in by a clock. Its hands rest at ten o'clock. Her broken watch shows the
same time. A doctor arrives and estimates the time of death based on body temperature
at between nine forty five and ten fifteen the previous evening. Phone records show the
woman made an emergency call at nine fifty seven, but the line was then cut. So here's
the question. What time was the woman killed? It's possible of course that one of these
pieces of evidence is wrong. The phone company's records may be wrong. The clock may have been
slow or fast or broken on another occasion. So it's very remotely possible that all the
evidence is wrong. So what makes us confident that each piece of evidence is right? It's
the fact that they all point to the same time. If each piece of evidence was wrong then the
times they point to would be all over the place. The fact that they all point to the
same time is called consistency. Consistency is what turns an observation into evidence
and we all use it all the time to make deductions about what happened in the past. In the story
of The Earth Made Easy I showed four photographs and asked people to deduce which was the earthquake,
the tornado, the hurricane and the flood. I asked a lot of creationists to take the
test but they were either vague about their results or refused to tell me whether they
got the right answer and how they derived it. I suppose an admission that we can work
this out is an admission that we can work out what happened in the past. But it doesn't
matter, I know they got the right answer and we all know how they derived it. They looked
for the same things any rational person looks for, consistency. If people living in this
town told you this damage was caused by an earthquake you wouldn't believe it. Why not?
Because the limited extent of the damage is inconsistent with an earthquake, or a flood
or a hurricane come to that. But the single trail of destruction is consistent with the
path of a tornado. And if we look closer we'll discover that brick structures remain undamaged,
also inconsistent with an earthquake, while lighter objects have been strewn all over
the place. Inconsistent with an earthquake, but entirely consistent with a typhoon. So it
really doesn't matter what our eyewitnesses claim. Maybe they were mistaken or maybe they were lying
or maybe they're delusional. Eyewitnesses often get things wrong but the evidence doesn't lie.
We're intelligent enough to work things out for ourselves. Throughout this series which took us
from the beginning of our universe to the human migration out of Africa, through all of this the
evidence has been consistent. All of the millions of pieces of individual evidence that form the
hundreds of theories in dozens of different scientific fields, each and all are consistent
with a single time frame and with each other. So the argument creationists use to suggest how
one piece of evidence might possibly be wrong can't override one unanswerable fact that all
the scientific evidence is consistent. And none of the evidence is even remotely consistent with
the universe, Earth and every living thing in it being instantly created 6,000 years ago. So where
an imaginary God was there to explain all the gaps in our knowledge, as we learn more about how the
world works and how we got here, the role of this deity diminishes until it finds a place beyond the
current extent of our knowledge inside the Big Bang. Cosmologists admit that they don't yet know
what caused the Big Bang. I don't mind people telling me that their religion does have the
answer and that it's the absolute unassailable truth. But if that's the case then let's have
the details. Whatever lurks inside the world of quantum physics and singularity can't be masculine
or feminine. So what is this God thing? What did it do to cause the Big Bang? How did it all happen?
If you don't know then you really don't know much more than I do. The plain fact is that none of us
yet knows so let's stop pretending we do. Sitting around arguing about what we don't know is like
ancient Greeks trying to use philosophy to work out what powers the Sun. But one thing we do know
is that we can't use the Bible or the Quran as evidence because the evidence we can see shows
that these books are erroneous. Whatever it was that caused the Big Bang we know from observations
how the world has unfolded since then. There was no Garden of Eden, no man made out of clay and a
woman made out of a rib. We know this because we can trace our origins very clearly back to Africa
over 100,000 years ago. There was no instant creation of all the animals. We have overwhelming
evidence that animals evolved over hundreds of millions of years. There was no global flood.
We've dug and drilled through miles of rock stretching back billions of years and the
evidence for a worldwide flood 4,000 years ago just is not there. The universe was not made in
a few days. It's nearly 14 billion years old and we can see galaxies so far away that the light from
them takes billions of years to reach us. And since we know all this then we also know that
the deity described in these holy books is a myth. A Bronze Age guess aimed at explaining the yawning
gaps in our knowledge 3,000 years ago. The problem is these books have been believed for so long it's
difficult to wean people off them and that makes for a dangerous world in which Bronze Age myths
hold greater power over some leaders and some nations than rational thought. I'm not just
talking about the obvious dangers of religious intolerance. The world is facing unprecedented
environmental challenges in the 21st century. We can't act under the assumption that a benign
being is watching over us and will make sure we come to no harm. Or worse follow a book that tells
us the ultimate destruction of our environment is the will of some invisible deity and that the best
way to save ourselves is not to try to fix the damage but to pray to the deity. This has been
the futile practice of humans for thousands of years. Natives praying to a volcano god instead
of taking to their canoes. I hope this series has shown why we can't afford to be complacent.
If we assume the fate of our world is sealed and out of our hands then it soon will be.
So what happens now? Well the series of videos that explains the evidence for our origins is
finished. On this channel I'll continue to upload videos explaining scientific concepts and the next
one will be the Ice Age Made Easy. And I've started a new channel Pothola54 Debunks to debunk
creationist junk science and fake claims and also to answer questions. Because I expect a lot of
complaints about the new series and attempts to get the channel blocked I'm keeping it separate
from the Made Easy series on this channel. And finally thank you to all those who've written in
to tell me I'm going to hell. You've probably realized by now that I'm impervious to these
pathetic scare stories. And to those who've asked what if I'm wrong my answer is the same as yours.
What if I tell you that you have to go outside right now and howl at the moon or a monster will
crawl out from under your bed tonight and boil you in acid? You may think that's nonsense but
what if you're wrong? As you can see when it's tried on you it just doesn't work. And to all
those who've asked where I'll go when I die I'm happy to say I'll be in the same place I was in
1947 and 1853 and 1622. I'll be a bunch of atoms spread across the landscape. Is that an awful
picture? A hundred years ago not being alive didn't bother me so I don't suppose it will bother me a
hundred years from now. Let God's pale archangel, the grim reaper come. He can hack my bones, he can
step up on my gravestone, he can kiss my bone, I don't care. Oh and one more thing, I'm delighted to take the
blasphemy challenge and announce that I deny the Holy Spirit.
He was a blacksmith by trade. He used to live on his own. She was a little old maid. She was all
gristlin' bone, just a crone that you might not have fancied yourself. She was not born to attract.
She was lined up for the shelf if it were not for the fact the blacksmith loved her well. He loved her
like hell. He used to grunt and sigh fit to die but from afar for he was shy. As blacksmiths often
learn. She made a meager livelihood from a homemade toffee that she'd sell. Up and down the
neighborhood to a butterscotch and caramel clientele and optimistically she used to think that she'd get
her husband yet. She was far too modest, too wink, too proud to be coquette. You bet cause she'd got
a squint. She was skinny, she was skint. It never seemed that she, so palpably, bizarre but none could
ever be a farmer fatter. Time has no time to spare.
