We'll try to explain our thinking on how we're coming across and why we're doing overkill the way it is.
You can think and draw at the same time?
Yeah.
And especially if it's gonna be overkill, his equipment's gotta be overkill as well.
Oh, heck yeah.
Always remember, always remember, he's tough, but he's not violent.
Along those lines, he's got the biggest shoulder pads ever existed.
I figured he would.
Okay, I'm gonna give him, I'm gonna give him some big knee pads here,
because a guy like him that's got some armor and got some guns and stuff like that,
Boy, he looks grim, doesn't he?
Kids, you know, I mean, the kids, the kids like the dark, moody stuff, I mean,
They seem to, yeah.
But I have a question I've been wanting to ask you guys.
How long does it take these people to get dressed, these kind of characters?
Who says they undress?
I mean, they're something, they have to get out quickly to save the world,
but it takes them an hour and a half to get into all of this stuff, because they work fast.
That's right, getting into the costume is like going to the bathroom in a comic book.
You never show it, but you assume that Superman and Batman and Spider-Man
actually do go and urinate every now and then, right?
Right, but you never do show it, do you?
No.
But you do show, very often you show people getting dressed, especially women,
I seem to recall that now and then.
Do you draw hands? Are you into hands?
Oh, yeah, I'm the best.
You do hands?
Why don't we give them, here, wires coming out here, coming down.
Oh, they love that stuff.
The kids love wires.
The wires that he'll triple.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
Hey, you draw good wires.
Oh.
Does he have a double identity? Is he really a meek accountant in real life?
Who else could he be besides Overkill?
Well, I mean, when he takes off all these clothes, is he a 87-pound weakling?
Do you see him taking a rough fist?
Okay.
Okay.
His thumb, he would have three different cannons that are facing you for the large kapooey.
So, right here.
They could be, like, missile launchers or whatever, but he's going to have those right over here.
What makes you make those value judgments? Why only three? He's got four knuckles.
Because the reader's crazy.
Why does he have more on that side than that side?
No, no.
For the sake of our unseen viewers, is this really the type of thought process that you guys go through when you create characters?
Yes, except for we have more than 20 minutes.
We're using probably longer than you usually do.
Well, I think I've got to say, seriously, which isn't easy for me to do,
but I think it's very impressive that in a matter of 20 minutes, you guys could come up with something like this.
I mean, bad as it is, it's still impressive that you were able to do it this quickly.
Yeah, that's a cool logo.
Rob, didn't you promise that you would draw and we would do the talking?
I'm sorry.
And when you grow up a little more, you know, we'll let you in there with the grown-ups.
When you were creating characters, Stan, what was the process back then?
I mean, because Rob and I right now, we do our own writing and our own drawing.
We don't collaborate with anybody anymore, so...
That's the problem, and I've been meaning to talk to you guys about that.
Boy, he is one grim-looking guy.
There's no way this man can move.
He's got to have a power to defy gravity, I would say, just looking at him.
He's a tank. I mean, what do you think?
Now, the funniest thing would be if you say that these are jets and he's the fastest man alive.
We've got to justify all of this paraphernalia somehow.
I don't know that you're really doing my character right.
That's all right, I guess, for such beginners.
We have a minute and a half or so. I want to tighten those feet.
All right, guys?
Give him an ankle bone here, an ankle bone here.
I think it takes you longer to sign your name than to do a picture.
Heck yeah, it is.
I'm going to step out, okay?
Incidentally, you guys have ruined us. We've decided to give up comics and we're going into showbiz.
