The one thing we all know about the theory of evolution is that it was proposed by Charles
Darwin about 150 years ago. Well, not quite. The idea that organisms evolved was floating
around for 2000 years before Darwin and was revived a bit before his time by Jean-Baptiste
Lamarck. But it didn't gain much ground because there was no obvious mechanism by which one
type of animal could change into another. Lamarck suggested that maybe animals changed
because they felt the need to change. It didn't sound very scientific and with no evidence
to support it the idea didn't go very far. What Darwin did was to show a plausible mechanism
by which these changes could happen and let's not forget poor old Alfred Wallace who came
up with the same idea and published it jointly. The paper they wrote was this. Darwin had
to come up with what he called the principle of natural selection. These days we tend to
call this the theory of evolution as a kind of shorthand but that's confusing because
we also use the term theory of evolution to describe the fact that organisms evolve. I
want to leave the physical evidence and the proof of evolution for the next video. In
this video I just want to look at the mechanism to see whether sitting in our armchairs and
not doing a bit of research we can predict evolution in animals purely on the basis of
what we know. That animals replicate themselves and that the replication isn't perfect. There's
always variation. Just taking these two known facts and nothing else what do we expect might
happen if we keep copying a hypothetical animal generation after generation in a changing
environment. Let's say the hypotheticus lives in a tropical climate grazing happily on grass
and plants. We know from our two principles that not every hypotheticus is the same. This
one has been born with a slightly longer neck. This one has slightly longer legs. The third
has slightly longer claws and the fourth has a slightly hairier body. Over time herds of
hypotheticus spread across the continent but the climate changes and the continent dries up. Only
scrubby bushes and hardy tubers can survive. The hypotheticus with the slightly longer neck can
obviously get to more leaves than its neighbours. Inevitably taller and longer necked hypothetica
are better fed and fitter and therefore reproduce more. A few generations later the drought has
caused overall numbers to dwindle but there are more long-necked animals but natural selection
doesn't suddenly stop just because average neck length has increased. The longest of the long
necks now has an advantage over ordinary long necks and so the process continues. This principle
is so easy to understand you have to wonder why it's so frequently misunderstood. So let's take
this one step at a time and see where the confusion lies. Surely no argument there. By which I mean
children are like their parents and inherit their traits. For example if it gets colder animals with
hairier bodies will have a slightly better chance of survival. Pretty obvious? Like genes for hairy
bodies. Genes that don't confer these advantages tend not to get passed on because the animals
that carry them have a lower chance of survival. So if each of these steps is blindingly obvious
then so is the conclusion. Over time animals should change. So why don't we see it? Why does
a dog always give birth to a dog and a horse always gives birth to a horse? Well natural
selection doesn't suggest they shouldn't. What natural selection tells us is that a horse will
always give birth to a horse that's very slightly different. After thousands of generations these
differences add up. If you want an example of imperceptible changes you once looked like this.
Maybe now you look something like this but you've probably looked in a mirror every day of your life.
So when did this change take place? Did you notice it? Okay let's accept that organisms do change
over time but how do we know they change into different species? A process known as speciation.
I'll leave the evidence of speciation for the next video and look at this through the example
of our hypotheticus. We've seen how it can grow taller over time in order to survive a change of
climate but there may be other ways of surviving. This hypotheticus for example may not be able to
compete well for leaves but because of its longer claws it can dig more easily for tubers so it would
have a better chance of survival and its genes would be passed on. The question is not whether
the hypotheticus would change over time but what could possibly stop these changes from happening.
Each generational change may be tiny but millions of years of accumulated change in a changing
environment leads to two completely different animals. The question is whether their DNA would
by then be so different that they could no longer breed. In the next video we'll see if there's any
physical evidence to give us the answer. Anti-evolutionists have other objections
which come up time and again. Well if you're imagining something like this then obviously
you can't but using our theory of natural selection and breaking it down into evolutionary
steps it's easy to understand. Simple organisms would have a sensory system like the amoeba which
can sense heat, cold and chemicals. This could then evolve into a sensory system with a central
processor just like in insects. Individuals with better organised centralised nervous systems would
be able to do more things and pass on this improved trait. The central processor would get
bigger and better. Again in stages. I won't spend time explaining the evolution of the eye here
because there are a number of good videos on YouTube that do that job including this one.
No, evolution requires variation. If information is a fancy way of saying bigger ears,
hairier bodies and longer necks then fine, we know that happens. We can see it. If information
means miraculously adding completely new parts then of course that doesn't happen and we know
why. In the next video I'll show the evidence that animals adapt existing morphology for new tasks.
Trying to characterise evolution as an accident doesn't change what it is or the evidence for it
and clearly there's nothing random about natural selection itself because genes survive only if
they're best suited to survive. Mutations are just the inevitable result of DNA that didn't make a
perfect copy and they're very common. The result is variation not some science fiction army of
mutant ninja turtles. In fact there's new evidence that mutations don't play such an
important role in natural selection and this might be a good time to look at what we've learned since
Darwin. At the time Darwin and Wallace published their paper on natural selection Louis Pasteur
was developing his pathogenic theory of medicine the idea that germs cause disease but it would be
laughable to presume that biologists haven't learned anything new about pathogens since 1860.
Of course our knowledge has advanced so why would our knowledge of evolution be any different?
Biologists now know that mutations may not be the big engine of change. DNA can be changed by
proteins which turn genes on and off a process known as cis regulation. Epigenetics is a huge
field but it drastically changes Darwin's premise that genes are just passively sitting there being
manipulated by environmental changes around them. Putting this very simply biologists have
discovered that DNA can exaggerate traits that are being naturally selected. Instead of being the slow
and steady change that Darwin envisaged evolution seems to happen in fits and starts. It's as if
natural selection is occasionally turbocharged. Cis regulation and epigenetics might explain why
this happens. These and many other discoveries don't overturn the 19th century idea of natural
selection any more than modern microbiology overturns the discoveries of Louis Pasteur
but they do show that Darwin's ideas were crude and incomplete. There's a lot more to the mechanism
that drives evolution yet to be uncovered. Okay so we've deduced from the comfort of our armchairs
that evolution ought to happen. At least I hope so. Now it's time to do the research and see if
these ideas are supported by physical evidence. Meet me in the next video.
you
