English Mojito.
Look it's green.
It'll make this whole experience better, just like in the book.
So today's concoction is an English Mojito, because the author of this week's book is
British.
Really, really British.
And it's green, which in the book that we read, is like the happy color, the happy calming
color.
It's the one that you get high off of.
So I don't know if we mentioned this, I think we did.
The way we do this is we don't discuss this ahead of time.
So it's kind of like a fairy tale curse, that if we mention the thing, we can't mention
the thing, just so our discussion of the thing is a lot more authentic.
And this week we definitely haven't discussed the thing.
We also have a policy here on Booze Your Own Adventure that we don't say anything in our
reviews that we would not say to the author's face.
Because we are writers of a sort, we know how hard it is, and we know how shitty it
is when like some two-bit nobody just shows up all like, I'm gonna talk about your thing
person.
So today we're discussing Shades of Grey, of an indeterminate number of shades of grey,
by Jasper Ford.
It is a dystopian thing written for an adult audience.
Nella, what did you think of Shades of Grey?
I liked it.
Wait, hear me out!
I don't like the movie Brazil that much.
This felt like Brazil.
I liked it better than Brazil.
I would recommend it to people who liked Brazil.
I'd read the sequels, but it was definitely a book that meandered a lot throughout its
world building.
And the last quarter of the book decided, oh right, we've built up this world, let's
get to what's actually wrong with it and why our character should care.
Also, I'm sure we're gonna talk about female character.
This made me never want to read another book again.
The thing I hated about it was the process of reading the words.
On a concept level, if someone had described it to me, I'd be like, okay, that's a book.
But as I was reading it, I derived no enjoyment from it.
It felt like I couldn't remember why I enjoyed reading.
Period.
Wow.
Wow.
I'm sure Mr. Ford is a lovely person.
Let's start with the schtick, which is in this dystopian world, which takes place about
500 years after what would be our civilization.
We never find out the something that happened, right?
Or we haven't found out yet because this is what I hated.
It's a trilogy.
I just wanted a book that ended and it's about the halfway point I was like, there's no way
we can resolve this all in one book.
Surely, surely.
Oh no, is it?
Is it?
And then the last 20 pages, as it rushed to the end, I was like, oh God, here it comes.
Here it comes.
Sequel.
Be sure to read more in the next book.
But talking about the schtick of the book, that in this dystopian future, society is
based on people's perceptions of color.
So you are a color.
You can only see one natural color and then synthetic color is used to great extent.
When I was in high school, I read Brave New World and I liked it.
This was like if Brave New World didn't have a point or it did have a point, but the point
was like less sophisticated than we get in young adult dystopias.
Well, cause it's a point that's been done.
Well, yeah.
And I was like, every time it would like, I mean, it has a very glib sense of humor
so we can kind of sidestep that criticism, I guess, sort of, but it still had that underlying
tone of like conformity bad.
And it's like, this came out in 2009.
This is a little old, you guys.
And I was like waiting for it to add to that because it was so boring.
And the thing is, usually like Divergent, I gave Divergent a lot of shit.
I like Divergent better than this.
This is how much I hated this book.
Wow.
Divergent, the dystopia of Divergent was really kind of not about anything.
Like you could really stretch it and say it's about like high school cliques, but it wasn't,
it was a story first, you know, and I guess any kind of like social commentary was like,
they like wafted it over the book and said like, here's some commentary, sort of, not
really.
It wasn't meant to be a commentary.
Yeah.
So, I mean, like, I still maintain that Divergent's not good, but it had a story with tension
and characters.
And this, and this reminds me of like an io9 review I read of The Bone Season where it
was like world building for the sake of world building.
And I kept imagining like Frank Underwood turning to the camera as the narrator repeatedly
explained the world to us, like a thing would happen.
And then he'd be like, oh, well, you know, this swatch is like the duh-duh-duh, and then
we have to do this thing over here in order to get our swatches.
And it was just like the most clunky, unnatural world building I can remember.
Usually world building is done with action.
Usually world building is done with a thing that happens, not the narrator constantly
over and over to the point of like, is this a parody?
It felt so British.
It did feel really British.
And like the, the elements of the dystopia, like it felt like a sort of like a BuzzFeed
article, you know, you're British if, you know, like all of the elements of the dystopia
where people, you know, there'd be like an uncomfortable thing in the room and we got
to pretend like it's not there because Britain, you know, like stuff like that.
And I was like...
The hyper-politeness.
Yeah.
So it felt very British in that way.
But that's not a bad thing.
The world building and the way it was done, I thought was a bad thing because it was not,
I mean, it's sort of like show, don't tell.
It was so telly.
It was maddeningly telly.
And it's like he could construct a sentence okay, and like sometimes slip a joke in there.
I liked the risk joke.
It was a good one.
It was a good one.
Good as a stretch.
And the second the main love interest shows up, I was like uh-oh, we got a strong female
character on our hands.
She threatened to punch me.
I dig that.
With that nose she has.
Dat nose.
She hits people.
Yeah.
She's not a nice person.
Filter.
She hits him constantly.
And he's charmed by this.
As men are wont to do.
I mean I just, every fucking sentence of this god forsaken character, I kept envisioning
like the Kate Beaton strong female character.
I don't need no man.
There's just something about this incredibly weak male lead.
Oh my god.
He was such an incredibly weak male lead.
I mean this is like why I hated American Gods.
There was no driving tension.
He doesn't want anything.
And I mean you're just like, you're reading a book with no driving tension.
No, it's all about, he just wants to actually win the other girl back at home.
But there's not a driving tension.
That's like a subplot.
That's barely a subplot.
So there's driving tension not really in the subplot, where he kind of nonchalantly, indifferently
kind of likes a girl back home, but he doesn't seem to care about anything.
And I cannot stand when your protagonist doesn't care about anything, and if your protagonist
does not care about anything, your world building had better goddamn well be the most fucking
interesting thing imaginable.
Like I was just sort of thinking like, if this was written as a YA, she would have been
the lead and it would have been from the Grey's perspective, I feel.
If you like Brazil and British long-dragging politeness.
Frank Underwood turning to the camera and explaining everything to you rather than showing
it.
No, at least Frank Underwood is actually like really super enjoyable when he does that.
He's Richard III.
That's why it's worth.
How does this have such a high rating on Goodreads?
Seriously, if you like Brazil, you'll like this.
I can see liking this if you like the tone, and tone is like why you read things.
And because as I was reading it, I was just like, my problem was I was just so bored by
the world building.
I was just like, there's no point to this dystopia.
And that would be fine if there was a story or a driving tension, technically, I mean
I wouldn't even call it a story, it's just like one guy putters around for a few days
and then discovers a thing.
He shoves it all in the last fourth of the book.
Yeah.
On the whole, I think I really do enjoy YA more than this whole adult shit.
Well in terms of dystopia?
Yeah.
Because that was my point, it's kind of really hard to make a grand sweeping gesture by way
of allegory about society anymore.
I mean the Hunger Games did it really well because it kind of hit on something new, being
reality shows, which didn't exist in Aldous Huxley's time.
But even you look at something like Brave New World, which still feels like it has relevance
because it has so much to do with the society numbing you.
And also the Munsell.
Oh, Munsell is a color chart, I used it in Archeology.
It has a whole, it just pretty much has a shit ton of color swatches.
Well see, that's clever.
Well yeah, that's what I, like the whole-
Okay, I'm trying to think of something nice to say about this guy.
And also the test-
I was just like, I gotta find something nice to say about this, he clearly thought a lot
about this.
No!
I was just so unhappy.
And the test that they take to determine what their color percentage in vision is, is the
name of the guy who came up with the color blind test and shit.
Oh, the Ishihara.
Yeah.
So you knew this?
Yeah.
Or you looked it up?
No, I knew it.
So you knew this, and I didn't.
And I didn't really think about that.
But that is clever, now that I know that.
See, I said a nice thing.
I said a nice thing about this book I hated.
I think that's what kept me going, is that I did enjoy how much obvious thought he put
into this world and forcing it to work in this shtick.
Well, I mean, I thought the world in itself was not the problem, the problem was the way
it was presented.
I really wish Jane had not been the way she was.
I mean, I wish everything about the story.
I mean, I hated the main character, it was so fucking hackneyed, their way, this strong
female character, I'm a huge bitch, I need to be tamed, I'm sick of that.
You know?
Yeah.
And it was just like, from the second she's on screen and the first thing she does is
threaten to harm him, it's like, really?
Really?
We've written how many books, and we're going here?
How fucking hackneyed is that?
And it's sexist as shit, you know?
We're taming the shrew again.
We should be past this.
I mean, that would be fine if she was an interesting and well-rounded character, but she's not.
And obviously, some people will disagree, and that's fine, but a compelling narrative
is generally, and you look at Dexter in Game of Thrones and Breaking Bad, and it's like,
a compelling character is not someone who is good.
A compelling character is a driven character.
And I hold to this.
That's why I like Game of Thrones.
Everybody is very driven, you know?
And they're all differently driven, and that's what makes it interesting.
Like, in this book, there was no single character that was driven, and in YA, you tend to be
very driven because it's like, teenagers, and they want, you know, they want to find
their place in society, they want to do the thing, they want to be the king, you know,
whatever.
But Jane was driven.
Like, hackneyed though she was, and like, one-dimensional, but she was driven, but also
there was a sense that she didn't appreciate the danger she was in, because she's the lowest
class of, she's a Grey, they're pretty much the slave class, like, she's constantly pissing
everyone off.
But she is the Kate Beatonian strong female character.
Everyone's always talking about how they can't wait till, like, they can throw her out to
like, to be rebooted, like, which is a thing in this world, which, you know, ends up being
something else.
But, but she has no concept of, because she's got it all figured out, so she has no fear
of what they can throw at her.
So there's no tension for her.
So for her, there's no tension.
So it's like, even though she's driven, there's no stakes.
I, like I said, I, I liked it.
I didn't want to gorge my eyes out afterwards.
I went, hmm, that was alright.
I can't, like, it's like, sort of like one of those things where I kept thinking, like,
I guess he's not bad at writing, but I, everything I like about stories is absent.
I mean, I'm interested in checking out his other series, which is like a new war fairy
tale thing going on, or nursery rhyme thing.
But I'll do that on my own.
So next episode, I'm going to stop saying next week, because obviously we can't keep
Hey, you know, bro.
We busy.
What are you going to do?
Them full-time jobs.
Yeah.
So next episode, we're going to be discussing the outline for Viridian Saga Book 2, but
the next book thing, so, so we're going to be doing something special episode after next.
We're actually going to have a guest author who was, for realsies, published author.
Not that you self-published her, not really.
She went through the agony of, you know, the industry.
Her name is also Lindsay, and she wrote a book called The Art of Wishing, which is YA,
thank Christ, paranormal romance type thing.
And it is, I'm told it's about genies.
So I'm going to do that one with Lisa.
Lisa's going to be filling in for Nella.
And after that, yes, we will read the goddamn Kardashian sister YA novel.
And that is how I will punish you.
And also down the pipe, I have an ARC of John Scalzi's new book.
So we will probably go ahead and, yeah, he signed it for me, see?
Aw, yay.
I got a signature from that thing that you didn't get to go to.
Ooh, it has to do with highly contagious viruses.
This is right up my alley.
But we're going to try something new after we do The Art of Wishing, which will be the
next review, and of course the Kendall and Kylie Jenner book.
What was it?
Rebels, colon, City of Indra, colon, the story of, like, it has two colons.
And then we're going to actually review a thing that has not come out yet.
So we're going to review a thing before it comes out.
Like the real, like actual book reviewers.
Like actual critics.
It's exciting.
So yeah.
So I hope you enjoyed my suffering, because I'm going to enjoy yours.
Till the next time.
