Well, YouTube, I've been making videos for months now about the most controversial possible
topics, but recently it seems that only one person has had the god damn balls to make
a response.
And who's that?
Well, his name is the distribut- the distribution- look, I'm just gonna call him Chesterton,
because his avatar is a cartoon of G.K.
Chesterton.
Now look, Chesterton, we've got beef.
Take a seat, Chesterton, have some grapes.
Try the wine.
I trust you'll find everything sumptuous.
So Chesterton is a Catholic traditionalist YouTuber, and he's made a four-part series
of videos titled Lies of the Sexual Revolution, featuring Dan Savage, Laci Green, Lena Dunham,
and me.
Wait, why am I in this video?
These other people are way more famous than I am.
I guess that's good company.
I mean, Dan Savage is awesome, Laci Green does a public service, you know, her videos
aren't really for me, but-
Why do men think everything has to be for them?
Laci Green's videos are for naive 16-year-old girls, not jaded 28-year-old perverts, and
that's fine.
Anyway, he's put black bars over our mouths with the word LIES, so that's good.
In any case, I'm happy to be cast as a promoter of the sexual revolution, so let's do this.
And ladies, you may want to dig that bottle of Prosecco out of the back of the fridge,
because I'm gonna warn you in advance, this video is gonna be two weird men on the internet
debating about what kind of sex you should have.
I'm so sorry.
So
Chesterton's got beef with my video about pickup artists, remember, the one about BANG.
And of course, the feminist critique of Don Giovanni has the same problem of all feminist
critiques of pickup artists.
Once you acknowledge that consent is the only necessary requirement for it to be good, how
do you criticize a person who pursues it more earnestly?
He seems like a less hypocritical version of your everyday person.
Well look, GK, one of your main arguments in this video is that feminists have no ground
to criticize pickup artists, because you claim they believe that the only requirement for
good sex is consent.
But that's not what most feminists believe, not what I believe.
All consent does is establish that the sex is not rape.
And that, Chesterton, is a very low bar to set, both erotically and ethically speaking,
and I'm sure you'll agree.
There's all kinds of ways that consensual sex can be ethically questionable, for instance
if there's manipulation or deceit involved, or if a person with no emotional involvement
exploits someone with a lot of emotional involvement, and so on.
And pretty much any feminist I know will acknowledge this.
In fact, the raddest of the radfems think that pretty much all sex is problematic, because
of like, power dynamics.
Even if that's what they're into.
And as it happens, a lot of them are.
The feminist critique of the pickup artist mentality basically says that rouge and company
treat women as a mere means to sex, without any respect for their wishes or humanity.
In my video, I took the ethical issue as read, and basically just bashed rouge for being
a bad hedonist.
Because at least seeking pleasure is a worthwhile goal, whereas tabulating your bangs in a futile
effort to prop up your needy ego is, um, not.
So I took to Chesterton's comments section, and we had a brief exchange that got pretty
personal pretty fast.
He asked me if I knew how damaging sexual promiscuity could be to my partners, to which
I respond that...
Well, look, if we're talking emotional damages, I mean, there's gonna be emotional damage.
Of course there is.
Of course there's gonna be emotional damage.
We're all gonna be a little bit emotionally damaged, Chesterton.
I'M EMOTIONALLY DAMAGED RIGHT NOW!
But the good news is that the emotional damage caused by casual sex is really just a kind
of emptiness of the soul, a feeling of meaninglessness.
And I, Chesterton, am a veteran of feelings of meaninglessness, which, I mean, wah wah.
Get drunk in bed for a couple days and get over it.
I mean, if anything, it's romantic love that causes the real damage.
You know, it's the romantic love people who are throwing themselves off bridges and generally
behaving like a fucking jackass.
I'm just a fool, a fool in love with you.
Earth angel, earth angel, the one I adore, love you forever and evermore.
I'm just a fool, a fool in love with you.
And to be clear, I am not a sex guru, I am not a love guru, I don't encourage anyone
to emulate my terrible behavior.
I am a person on the threshold of being unable to function in society.
And to be honest, I find casual sex kind of difficult myself, which is why I need the
drugs.
The drugs, Chesterton!
You have failed to consider the drugs!
None of this is possible without the drugs!
The drugs, Chesterton!
The drugs!
You've got your wine, you've got your caffeine pills, your rhinestones.
The drugs are simply the best way to shut down the garbage emotions.
You know, like shame and fear, anxiety, you know, empathy.
That's why the sexual revolution is good for women.
If you liked this video, make sure to leave a comment.
I'm weary of this beef.
Now, GK has accused me of being glib and insincere, so I guess I better explain what I actually
think, huh?
So basically what I think is that in a free society, different people will choose lots
of different sexual lifestyles.
Some people will want to settle down and get married, and that's fine.
Some people will want to have a fucking baby, and that's also fine.
Someone needs to have the fucking babies.
But some people won't want to do that.
Some people will want to dip their balls in hot wax and pour wolves milk all over a stranger's
face.
And that's fine too.
Some people don't want to have any sexual or romantic relationships.
The point is, all of these things carry emotional risks.
You've got heartbreak, loneliness, excruciating boredom, this is just the human condition.
Heartbreak.
And no matter what you do, you have to take emotional risks.
Loneliness.
This is just the human condition.
Boredom.
And no matter what you do, you have to take emotional risks.
But as a society, we can make sex less risky for women by ending rape culture and slut
shaming and by instituting all-you-can-eat birth control, hence, you know, feminism.
And there are also things we can do as individuals to be safer, kinder, and more responsible.
If you do choose to have casual sex, things are going to go a lot better for you and your
partners if you try to remain honest, open, and communicative about what your intentions
are.
And for God's sake, use a condom.
Do not get pregnant or get anyone else pregnant.
It's a real downer, this echoing God's act of creation by bringing new life into the
world.
It's disgusting.
Now, speaking of God, there's not really any avoiding the fact that a lot of what separates
my view from GK's on this issue is the whole God issue, but I'm reluctant to say too much
about that because, well, it's come to my attention that there are already two or three
videos on YouTube on the subject of atheism, and I wouldn't want to be redundant.
I don't know, you guys might be in here, I'm not trying to keep up with what I am.
But Chesterton did suggest that I read Pope JP II's lectures on the theology of the body,
so we can take a look at that.
Now, I'm guessing this is going to call for a script and a voiceover, so hit it, Johnson.
So according to a book I read, God created man in his own image, and then he made a chick
version of the man, and they enjoyed a kind of pure sexuality based on the unity of their
flesh without the corruption of lust, covetousness, or general concupiscence.
And the DUMB FUCKING WOMAN ate the apple, and now everything sucks, because our hearts
are corrupted by sin, and our sexuality is perverted.
But the good news is that we're redeemable, and through the majesty of conjugal love,
we're still capable of recognizing the spiritual essence of God made visible in the form of
the human body, and the unity of our nuptial flesh parts.
Makin' babies.
Uh-huh.
Johnson, that was very glib and sarcastic.
Let the record show I don't approve of that sort of thing.
Anyway, um, desert anyone?
I meant to get a desert thing today before filming, but I forgot.
So eat your fuckin' beans.
So actually, there are some things about the theology of the body that I kind of agree
with.
I agree that there's something a little bit messed up about lust.
And by lust, I don't mean just sexual attraction in itself.
I mean this kind of creepy, covetous, gawking-it TNA on the subway platform, raw desire to
possess another human being.
I mean, what kind of a thing is that to want?
You know, it's creepy, it's intrusive, it's unpleasant, I don't care for it.
So, granted.
The other thing I like is the idea that the sexual attraction to a human body is actually
the lesser manifestation of a higher longing.
There's a famous quote, often misattributed to the historical GK Chesterton, that goes,
The man who rings the door at the brothel unconsciously does so seeking God.
Now this is really a platonic idea.
In the symposium, Plato talks about the highest form of love is the contemplation of the beautiful
bodies of young boys.
That's what he says.
The fuckin' petar ass.
The idea is that the contemplation of the beauty of physical bodies will lead to the
more refined contemplation of beauty itself.
And I'm not really with Plato on the details here, and I'm not with the Catholics either.
They're being too specific, but I would agree with the general idea that carnal desire
contains a longing for something beyond merely coming in or around another person.
There's an urge behind the sexual urge for a kind of transcendence, which may be why
the naked body features so often an art.
And to me, a person apparently deaf to the voice of God, transcendence lies in the little
spine-tingling moments where I feel elevated above ordinary human experience.
It's watching dabs of paint resolve into interplay of sunlight and shadow.
It's the peak of a sweet fuckin' guitar solo.
It's the ability to regard the sadness and desperation of human life with simultaneous
horror and humor.
And in a sense, this is only the illusion of transcendence, since I'm not really getting
outside of human experience, I'm just pushing it to the limit.
But as I see it, all transcendence is an illusion.
There is no reaching beyond human consciousness.
But at least in my illusion, there's a kind of liberation from mere biology, unlike JP's
procreative conjugal love transcendence or the Golden One's procreative racialist transcendence.
The problem with you guys is you're obsessed with sex and procreation.
Am I the only genuine goddamn spiritualist around here?
Social conservatives, with their fixation on suppressing individual urges for the good
of the species, are starting to sound like a bunch of crypto-Darwinists.
Whereas I, for one, believe the individual human spirit can aspire to something higher.
And that is why I'm not, at heart, really a hedonist.
Racism is only a good philosophy for 3 to 4 hours at a time, maybe with the right drugs
as much as 10 to 12.
But that's it.
That's the limit on the intervals of pleasure.
And when you wake up from the crash, you're going to need another reason to not die.
So that's the point of transcendence, and also, you know, friends.
And the crash can be mitigated too.
You know, I have to wonder how much of social conservatives' horror and disdain for degeneracy
stems from their own feelings of shame and self-loathing that, with the right conditioning,
they could overcome.
So for instance, the Golden One, and yes I am obsessed with him and I do spend all my
time thinking about him, has been on this no-fap kick lately to preserve his masculine
vitality or whatever, and a lot of guys are getting into this now.
I don't know what it is about humans, we apparently just love coming up with reasons
to make ourselves not come.
But I think I've got a different solution, fellas, and you can consider this homework.
So the next time you cave, and you will, and indulge in a session of clammy self-abuse,
why don't you try listening to classical music?
I think you'll find that the highbrow associations will stave off feelings of degeneracy.
Choose something with a solo violin, maybe.
Yes, the cellos underneath are your heartbeat, the veritable life pulse.
I want you to focus your rising passion on the thread of the violin.
That is your moan of ecstasy, the song of your soul.
You can start using your imagination now.
Think about whatever you're into.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Don't lose the melody, though.
You're going to want to peak with a trill and cadence.
Oh yeah.
Oh yeah.
Fuck.
And that's, uh, the meaning of life.
So checkmate, Catholics.
Well thanks for watching my video.
Check the video description for my social media links, including my new livestream channel,
which you should subscribe to if you want notifications about my livestreams.
Thanks to my amazing patrons, I'm now doing this full-time, and I definitely wouldn't
be able to do videos like this without that support, so a huge thanks goes out to
Marasova, Percy Steamboat, Eris, Kaldrakalczyk, Robert Phillips, T-Shades, Your Friendly Neighborhood
Anarchist, Reihong, Romi Koya, Nailtak, Stealer of Souls, Vorone, NoNoNo, Bottled Sky, Raymond
Heinrich, Heterodox, Roman Olyushev, Kat Stass, and the rest of my mysterious benefactors.
New patrons will be in the credits next month, and let me know if I mispronounced your name.
Also, I'm so sorry.
