One week later, last week, we haven't moved from this spot.
Oh, I really like this shirt. It's pink.
This is my favorite sweater. It matches my booze.
So this week we're going to talk about genre and appeal, and we are going to figure out what our book is about.
What is the connecting thread between Fifty Shades of Twilight besides the really, really obvious thing?
Life begins at man.
Life begins at man.
Deeply, deeply insecure women.
Deeply insecure women.
Abusive relationship.
Yes, because it makes you a better person.
And also because you have to save them somehow.
Yeah, you have to save them.
You have to save them.
You have to save them.
Oh, and the biggie, the biggest biggie biggie, man withholds intimacy.
That would make sense.
The plot is trying to get what the man is withholding from you.
Fix him.
Life begins at man.
Martered.
Martered.
Martered.
Life begins at man.
The original idea we came up with at Sexy Alien Book, at Twitter, was...
It's an alien at a high school, and he's kind of Invader Zim style there.
But he's a good guy for some reason, but he's conflicted about something.
He's a splinter group.
Like trying to be on the down low.
Not wanting to be drawn into the intergalactic war that the humans don't even know about.
Yeah, there's an intergalactic war, and he's there for reconnaissance or something.
He doesn't like us, but...
That's the thing, though.
Right now, we've already given it more plot than Twilight or Fifty Shades.
Cry!
Cry like you've never cried.
Before.
To Stephanie Meyers' credit, oh my god.
Oh my god.
Twilight is so much better written than Fifty Shades of Grey.
It boggles my mind that so many people are reading Fifty Shades of Grey and going like,
yeah!
This is my fantasy, and if other people like it, great.
I feel like, in a way, E.L. James is like the Michael Bay of writing, because she's
alright at drawing people in and driving the plot forward, and people keep coming back
and keep going like, yeah, this is legit.
But it's just like, she's so mad.
Somebody driving the plot forward without having a plot, either.
I apologize, Mr. Bay.
That was way out of line.
I am so sorry.
I think you've had enough.
It's like, Michael Bay understands his craft.
E.L. James does not.
Fan fiction, most fan fiction, and there's definitely fan fiction that gets very plot-heavy,
but the majority of fan fiction is more focused on exploring the characters' relationships
with each other.
So, therefore, they tend not to have plot, but they are very focused on how the characters
interact, like the mistaken identities, the mistaken intentions, the fights, the tips.
That's why Twilight is so fanficky, is because nothing happens until the light—
And let it be said, we're not saying this to say that all fan fiction is bad.
It's not plot-heavy. It is enjoyable.
But there's clearly a demand for that.
There is a demand for it.
Demand, for the most part, by women, for character-driven stuff that's not plot-heavy.
And that is part of what drives me crazy about Twilight, is the fact that it's not plot-heavy
to the point where the plot, when it does show up, 600 pages in or so,
it's just so shoehorned in because it's like we need a conflict,
and the only conflict so far has been Edward being like,
No, I don't want it. Yes, I do. No, I don't. Yes, I do.
Fan fiction, when it's really well done, can be very psychological
and very revealing of people, which is why Fifty Shades, for example,
would be an absolutely amazing exploration of how an abusive relationship is built up
if it wasn't painted in a romantic light.
Was it your fantasy? Because it's pornographic detail.
Oh, very much so.
One person coming in and feeling worthless, and the other person saying,
I can give you, like, what worthless, you have all this worth, let me give it to you.
By tying you up. Or by...
Tying you and beating you with my alien rod.
Because we're derivative.
There's so much shame surrounding sex. If you're tied up, then you cannot,
and you're not responsible for your own actions, and then you can enjoy whatever's happening to you.
So we could find a way to contrivedly make it a paranormal thing
and throw in the BDSM, because why not?
This week's assignment, what is our genre?
Are we going to go with young adult, Twilight, I'm afraid of sex, we never have any.
Or we get married before we do.
Or are we going Fifty Shades, lots and lots and lots of sex.
But then wondering if we're a whore for liking it.
And you're not responsible for your own actions, and then you can enjoy whatever's happening to you.
I feel like I should mention that Twilight with Aliens has been done.
What's it called?
It was called Obsidian, and that's the big, I think that's the most popular one out there,
and it's literally, like, she moves to a new town, and this time it's in West Virginia,
and she, you know, meets this boy in school, and he's an alien, and...
Should this have a paranormal element to it?
Should it be aliens? Should it be robots?
Would Twilight with robots? I haven't seen, like, I sometimes poke around the young adult.
With androids?
You know, bitches love data. Why not?
Mm, bitches do love data. Fully functional.
He's fully functional.
What is our gimmick?
Fifty Shades with robots?
That would be, like, this is already 5,000% more awesome than any of these bitches.
The BDSM bots, and one of them grows a soul somehow.
So are they, like, sex bots that were like, yeah, it could be like an AI with Jude Law,
and he's like a prostitute bot.
This is already way too interesting for our project.
Tone it down!
Bring the thought level down, man.
She goes to school, and there's a robot.
He just wants to be a human. Or an alien.
He just doesn't want to live in District 9 anymore.
There's a prawn, but he's a sexy prawn.
He wears a human suit he made out of skin.
He can have, like, the Phantom. Like, he takes off his human mask, and she's like, you're beautiful.
One of my favorite moments in history, of the history of film, is the moment Edward Cullen
is, like, standing in the sun with this, like, you know, sparkle.
Like, he just went to the MAC store and, like, got sparkle-fied, and is looking at her, and says, with all sincerity,
This is the skin of a killer, though.
We're putting too much thought into this.
Yeah, but I'm liking that he takes his mask off, and she's like, you're beautiful. Man, just man.
So those are our assignments. What's our gimmick? What's our genre?
Young adult or, uh, sexy sci-fi with actual sex.
Or is it even sci-fi? Is it paranormal?
And of course, all this will be going up on what will become our idea wall.
Yes. Right behind us.
So you see there's this glorious blank wall behind us.
We need to fix this, so send us wall things so we will have ideas and fun romance-novel-y things
for us to put up on our wall.
Send us your ideas about gimmick genre, all sorts of fun observation.
Tweet us at shayapocalypse, hashtag 50shadesofgreen, and of course you can follow us at shayapocalypse.
Leave comments at shayapocalypse.com and on our Blip page at 50shadesofgreen.
You can also follow sexyalienbook if you just want to laugh.
Because I will retweet anything I think is funny.
That shit was hilarious.
Be sure to tune in next week when we change our clothes and discuss characters.
What's their appeal? Why do we love these ladies?
Why do we identify with them?
And what makes us so hot about our abusive male love interests?
And why is there always an ethnic third wheel?
We need an ethnic third wheel.
We need an ethnic third wheel.
But that's what's not been done.
Chinese? Too common?
Indian.
Indian!
But the other-no we discussed the other kind of Indian!
In Twilight, he's Native American.
In 50 Shades, he's Mexican.
And so without-no.
Like, no argument on this, he's gonna be from India.
It's-sorry guys.
Sorry guys.
It's India.
It's India.
It's India.
