The first two Fallouts are still two of the best games ever.
Two of the most engaging worlds and stories
ever crafted for players to explore.
♪ ♪
So the developer went bankrupt.
The Fallout intellectual property
was then sold to Bethesda.
There were those who had minor problems
with the direction they took the series.
But when you shoot a guy just right,
his guts go everywhere.
So overall the game did very well.
A lot of people liked Fallout 3.
Then again, a lot of people liked Clerks 2,
so humans aren't really viable as a species.
But then, less than two years later,
Fallout cheated death.
♪ ♪
Developed by Obsidian Entertainment
with a team including people who worked on the original games,
Fallout New Vegas represents everything great
about the original series along with all the good stuff
from 3 that was worth keeping.
In addition to being one of the most incredible games
ever made, it's also really interesting
to talk about from a design perspective.
It's not just a game.
It's a flipping game design doctor,
and it's here to put on a clinic.
I didn't write that line.
It just appeared in the script.
New Vegas is the sort of game
where you can open a manhole cover
expecting, like, a sewer level
and instead discover that the local people
have formed a cult dedicated to blood
and retrofitted the sewers into a fighting arena.
Come on, there has to be a boring quest here.
Okay, the lady who runs this place
wants me to find her some mantis eggs.
Fetch some eggs.
That's gotta be the most boring quest
there could possibly be.
Okay, the eggs are in this abandoned vault.
Great, looking for eggs in some gray corridors.
That sounds...wait, it's overgrown with plants.
And there's environmental storytelling
warning me not to go in?
Oh, man, this vault is cool.
It's overgrown, and there's a bunch of stories
on the computers about the experiments
that went on in there, and it's creepy
and way more visually interesting
than you'd expect a vault to be,
and is that...oh, oh!
♪♪
One of New Vegas' best features
is its ability to make you invested
in its quests and locations.
Vault 22 is one of the many parts of the world
that sounds on paper like somewhere familiar
which then goes out of its way to be completely unlike
you expect in every possible way.
Players of three will already have an intimate awareness
of how vaults can be, having been forced
to walk around in one for an hour
before the game even starts,
and several side quests also take place
in very similar vaults with slightly different aesthetics
and different enemies in them.
Instead of Officer Mac, you get Officer Gary.
Gary!
The most interesting vault in three
is full of people called Gary
who yell Gary at you.
Ha, ha, ha, Gary!
I mean, it's pretty funny.
On a surface level, it's easy to see
why Vault 22 is a more compelling place to explore.
It's a bit nicer to look at with its spots
of overgrowth in the halls and plants everywhere,
the cave network it gives way to
and its more run-down areas,
and it's populated with enemies
unique to this one location called Spore Carriers
which look like humans but creepily hide in foliage
and can't be targeted by V.A.T.S. while they're hiding,
meaning you have to be able to spot them
through their camouflage in order to fight them
which makes them genuinely creepy and, ugh!
And while the unique aesthetic and cool enemies are fun,
what makes Vault 22 a good case study
in Obsidian's design philosophy
is the ways it creates a strong narrative experience
for players and uses its mechanical elements
to enhance player engagement with the story.
Firstly, just for convenience's sake,
the vault can be discovered in more than one way.
Six different quests lead you to this vault.
You don't necessarily come here
looking for those delicious eggs.
One guy wants you to find the secret
of how they're growing all these plants so easily
since, you know, growing plants in the wasteland
is a pretty big deal.
Somewhere on a computer system
in the vault are files on how they managed all this,
but on your way out of his office,
another scientist stops you and says he sent, like,
ten other guys there already and none of them have come back
and asks you to find out what happened
to another researcher who went there.
This is a trick the game pulls often with its quests.
Even something as simple as,
download some files for me, please,
is given extra layers of narrative meaning.
You're actually being sent to a dangerous place
without proper warning
and other people are missing there.
This creates a sense of anticipation to the level.
The vault has tons of computer logs
detailing the work they did,
the events with mind-controlling spores
that led to everyone's death or infection,
and a bunch of new logs left by the researcher
who went missing when she came here,
and because you're actually trying to find out
what happened to the researcher,
it's much harder to ignore the story
that's going on here than it would be otherwise.
The player is also being given mechanical rewards
that really incentivize exploring
and engaging closely with the material.
There's a unique laser rifle you can't get
anywhere else in the game hidden in this vault
on some poor guy's corpse.
The game never draws attention to it.
It's not, like, a reward you get
for beating a boss or something.
It's just hidden in a corner somewhere,
and the genius of this kind of design
is that once players have found something like this once,
they're gonna realize there could be
stuff hidden anywhere.
Suddenly they're paying that much more attention
to the environments that they're traveling through
and partaking more in the stories of the place.
You might not really care that much
about the story of little side quests like this,
but if you know there might be a cool gun in here somewhere,
you're paying a lot more attention
than you might have been.
Some of the quests technically put
an objective marker in the corner
leading you to the necessary part,
but when Vault 22 has worked its magic,
you forget it's there.
The true beauty of great game design
is when all its artificial justifications,
quest indicators, loot to find,
experience points to earn, melt away,
and you really feel like you're in a creepy place
looking for answers.
Eventually you find the researcher is alive
and can help them flood the lower floors with gas
and blow up the spores
so they don't pose a threat to anyone else.
♪ ♪
Good. You survived.
Then she decides to delete the computer records.
The person you optionally saved as a result of exploring
wants to delete the data you actually came here for.
If you already downloaded it,
she asks you to delete your copy too,
so this mistake can't be repeated,
and if you refuse, she attacks you.
Even simple-seeming fetch quests have twists
and the sense of a story you're taking part in
and making choices about
because there's a real moral dilemma here.
Do you really trust this guy with research
that killed a bunch of people already?
We're with the government for goodness sake.
Have a little faith in us.
You have to be good at science
in order to reason out with her that it's probably good
to have a record of the mistake so people don't repeat it.
What could have been a simple fetch quest
to find some data ended in making an ethical decision
about whether the information you found deserves to exist.
The advantages of this design are clear
when you contrast with the Gary Vault in 3.
The enemies are kind of cool for a little while,
but there's no quests or story or choices to make,
so the experience isn't particularly involving.
You don't really have any reasons to be here.
There's a really useful piece of loot in this vault,
a bobblehead that permanently increases your charisma,
and even though it's technically quite hard to miss,
it's just sitting on a table deep in the vault,
getting to it requires trawling through
the rest of a location that has nothing else worth finding
and enemies whose gimmick was wearing thin after Gary 3.
I'm willing to bet most players got bored
and left before they found it.
If you found this, be honest.
You didn't find it because the location was so cool
it made you want to look around and see all of it.
You found it because you were using a guide
to find all the bobbleheads.
Thanks, Carl.
Eventually, players lose interest
in picking through empty buildings
full of locked, easy safes
in case there's something interesting in them.
♪ ♪
♪ ♪
♪ ♪
Oh, boy, a bottle cap?
Meanwhile, Vault 22 isn't even the coolest vault
in New Vegas.
Vault 11 is straight up an incredibly
well-written piece of fiction,
and it's just hiding off in a little nook
waiting for you to be sent there as part of a quest
for the Brotherhood of Steel.
I need you to go on this important quest for me.
Our air conditioner's broken.
Yep, yep, yep, great, great!
I'm going to destroy this faction.
This approach to quest design is all over the place,
offering you very simple and straightforward
seeming things and then pulling the rug out from under you.
Honestly, there are probably too many.
It's at the point where if you happen to pick up
enough cute little bottle caps with stars on them,
you stumble into a quest to discover
a legendary treasure.
You get random encounters with people
murdering each other over them.
After you find your first one,
this guy Malcolm eventually tracks you down
and tells you about the quest.
He's kind of notorious for doing it
at really unexpected times.
You might notice he seems to be at a weird angle
looking down at me.
That's because on this play through,
I was crouching preparing for a fight
when he found me.
Hello there.
It was actually kind of terrifying,
but I admire his dedication.
Now give me the caps.
Yeah!
Okay, I'm gonna be nice about Fallout 3.
There's some good stuff in there
and some of these quests are genuinely good
like when a talking tree asks you to kill it
in spite of its existence bringing people hope
or resolving a dispute between two broken people
masquerading as comic book characters
and harassing a town
or when an old woman asks you to find her
the world's last remaining Stradivarius violin.
A handful of the quests in Fallout 3
end up being genuinely good, funny,
and even touching at times.
If anything, they annoy me in a particular way
because they made me see how amazing a game would be
if it was filled with quests like these.
Ahem, New Vegas is a game filled with quests like these,
but hey, maybe it's a quality over quantity type thing.
I mean, even if you don't like the quests in 3,
at least there's a lot of them.
Obsidian only had 18 months to make New Vegas
so there's no way they could make that many quests.
♪
But hold on.
To really explore what makes the gameplay
in these quests so much more engaging,
we should cover some of the more serious
core mechanical changes
between these supposedly similar games,
and to do that, we should go back to how in the quest
having a high science skill affects dialogue.
Actually, no, we should probably go back
to the beginning of the game.
Ugh, let's just start again.
♪ To the town of Alfre who wrote a stranger one fine day ♪
Get it? It's like a clever reversal
of the chapter in the Fallout 3 video.
Uh, it doesn't matter.
New Vegas' opening, character creation process,
and first area are just the best I've ever seen
a game introduce itself and its core gameplay.
Let's take a look at some of the things it does.
♪ Heartaches by the numbers ♪
Pressing the new game button causes the player
to get shot in the face.
♪
New Vegas seemingly goes out of its way
to begin with the logical opposite
of something as cliche as the main character's birth.
You're then revived by Doc Mitchell
who put you back together after a robot cowboy.
Yes, I said that right. Robot cowboy!
This is the best game ever!
Dug them out of their shallow grave.
The opening gives the player
a deliberate barrage of questions.
What was I shot over? Who was this guy?
What was he saying about a delivery?
Why were the guys with him so differently dressed?
He referred to them as Khans. Who are they?
Or if you've played Fallout 1 and 2,
what are they doing here?
These mysteries are a really compelling hook.
You know how a lot of players ignore the main story
in open world RPGs and go do something else?
That's because the story didn't interest them.
Going in search of Benny and the platinum chip
he shot you for sounds really cool,
so a lot more players are gonna wanna find him.
Even the way Benny talks in, like,
an old 50s Vegas style.
But I ain't a fink. Dig?
The fact he's wearing a cool checkered suit
in the post-apocalypse, all of this stuff
really makes you wanna track him down
and find out what his deal is.
What in the goddamn?
Benny and his motivations and personality
are really cool to learn about.
It helps that he's voiced by Matthew Perry, too.
John Gonzalez, the lead writer for New Vegas,
did a really fantastic job with him.
And while I'm at it, Gonzalez is like an unsung hero
in all the games he works on.
Like, he co-developed the Nemesis system
for Shadow of Mordor?
You know, like, the best thing in that game?
Actual quote from Gonzalez's LinkedIn.
I was the lead story guy on Fallout New Vegas.
Thank you, God.
No, John. Thank you.
Did I just imply that I'm God?
Players are much more likely to actively take part
in a story if they have questions
they actually want answering.
Also, did I mention the robot cowboy?
♪ My ramblin' days were through ♪
Fallout 1 and 2 had the right idea
when character creation was one screen long
and then the game just started right away.
There you are in the world. Have fun.
Try to get further than Ed did.
Granted, the character creation screen
was also evidence Black Isle didn't have a UI designer.
Literally every first time Fallout player
has accidentally named their first character non
because they were supposed to type it into here
but still, they were onto something here.
One of my biggest gripes about Fallout 3
was how long it took to start.
The opening sequence deciding your character's stats
and learning the basics of the gameplay
takes 19 years of in-game time
and honestly, it feels that long
before eventually your father realizes
he's forgotten to do the main quest
and escapes and you go after him.
It's only when you finally leave the vault
that the game properly opens up to be explored.
Fallout New Vegas's opening is as smooth as butter
and not the butter you keep in the fridge.
The butter your parents keep in a little dish by the table
so it's already smooth and melty when you need it
and it's just so spreadable
and every time you visit them,
you make a mental note to get one
but you forget again as soon as you
After the opening cutscene,
you're talking to Doc Mitchell
where you make your character
and then walk outside his house
and bam, the game begins.
Fallout 2 opens by forcing you to complete a dungeon
that's pretty repetitive after the first few times through.
It's one of the few things most people don't like about 2
and players often use mods to skip it entirely.
Can you imagine having, like, a decade of hindsight
on all the criticisms people had of Fallout 2
and then making a game where the opening
is, like, three times as long?
That would be a bit silly, wouldn't it?
Eh, I'm sure they'll learn the lesson for Fallout 4.
♪
The character creation process is really fun too.
You pick your starting stats
through a really cute device called the Vigor Tester
and then you get a psych exam
which involves an honest-to-god Rorschach test
which is just great.
Some players actually modded in
what they saw as options.
That's it. That's all it does.
It lets you pick two bears high-fiving
for one of the images.
22,000 downloads.
Including me, that's definitely two bears high-fiving.
When you get to pick your tagged skills though,
you'll notice the list of skills
is a little different from 3.
Big guns and small guns are missing, for example.
There's just guns now
but in addition to this,
all these skills have much more uses
than they did in the previous games too.
♪ When you say I love you ♪
Okay, look, we all love speech, right?
Kudos to the series for making a video game
where talking was a skill worth putting points into at all
but a problem plaguing Fallout games
since the beginning was that one skill
made you the master of half the game's
main form of interaction
which really wasn't ideal.
Games have tried to section off speech
into different types of speech
but let's be honest,
none of them have really worked.
New Vegas goes for the opposite solution.
It keeps speech as is
while giving other skills
the chance to influence dialogue.
The game is also cleverly using
its opening area, Goodsprings,
to great effect in tutorializing players
about this feature.
The first real quest in the game
is to prepare for an attack on the town.
This quest has multiple optional components
where you can ask the townspeople for help
and each of them needs convincing
using a different skill.
This whole quest is basically the game
showing you how many different ways you can play it.
Like, hey, if you were good at barter,
you could have talked this guy into helping.
All the players who took this quest
know that barter can influence dialogue
and not just how much things cost
and minor spoilers,
barter can be used to beat the final boss.
I'm not even kidding.
That's how many options you have here.
If you want Easy Pete
to share his dynamite with you,
you have to prove you wouldn't blow your head off
if he did.
He doesn't need $10 words to convince him.
He needs you to prove you're better
at throwing explosives than these clowns.
Now that's what I call a...
He blew himself up.
Checks like this for other abilities
are all over the game.
Speech is still really useful,
but conversations are so much more varied
in what they ask of player characters,
and that's great.
Medicine, a skill I ignored
in every other Fallout game,
now unlocks some of the best dialogue options
because it turns out being a doctor
in a post-apocalypse is really, really good
at opening doors for you.
What other game lets you do therapy
at a cannibal chef
until he has a breakdown and quits his job?
Players are more likely to feel like
the type of character they made
had a tangible impact on a conversation
which creates a rewarding sense of control.
On top of all of this,
the way dialogue actually works
has been changed significantly from 3.
In 3, if something required speech,
even if you had the maximum amount of speech,
the game could still randomly decide
you failed the check,
so you could build your character around speech
and still just not get to use it,
or you could build your character
around everything else
and just reload the game until you got it anyway.
In New Vegas, if you have the required skill,
it works.
It just works.
It even tells you if you don't have enough,
and in a choice that someone
should have won an award for,
it gives you a worse line to say as a result.
I really like this because it means
you can pick bad options on purpose
and see what happens. It's great.
Finally, I can role play as a complete loser
because I'm so sick of winning in real life.
So now speech is useful based on how many points
you put into it,
not whether the game decides it,
which makes this character creation
feel way more tangible and substantive.
The points feel like they actually matter.
Right after this comes another big change from 3.
After picking your tagged skills,
you get to pick up to two traits.
Which, well...
These were a really cool feature
in the early Fallout games.
Traits would optionally give you
some kind of interesting bonus
and a downside to go with them.
So you could be a one-hander,
so you're a bit more accurate with one-handed weapons
but a whole lot less accurate
with two-handed ones to compensate.
Some of them were just mild changes
like Bloody Mess, which makes every death animation
always the most violent one
for whatever weapon you were using.
I really love Jinxed,
which vastly increases the amount
of critical failures,
an otherwise pretty rare occurrence
for everyone in the game, including you.
Traits led to vastly different ways
of playing the game right from the outset.
They were a really cool addition to the RPG formula.
Everybody loved them,
and Fallout 3 removed them for no reason,
which was a shame because traits
were the spiciest part of character creation.
They're a chance to make a character worse at something
in exchange for a reward,
and that's a really interesting decision
to give to players.
I really like Four Eyes,
which reduces your perception by one
but you get it back and one more
once you find a set of glasses.
Once you account for that,
it's kind of like getting an extra special point,
but there's also a secret downside
you don't realize at first.
You can't wear glasses with power armor helmets
and stuff like that, so it affects what stuff
you end up wearing later in the game too.
Plus, as a guy who needs to wear contact lenses all day
or he'll fall over and die,
I feel very seen by this trait.
Having that kind of control
over what your character is like,
making them as unique as you want,
is kind of one of the central features
of role-playing games.
What sort of character the player makes
is one of their main forms of expression,
and it's so nice having them back.
One of the traits is Wild Wasteland,
which, actually, let's give it its own.
♪ ♪
The Fallout games have always been a very strong mix
of serious themes and ideas,
desperation and survival.
Your bones are scraped clean by the desolate wind.
But the series also has a tremendous sense of humor.
I was in bad shape and, well, I passed out.
How did you survive?
Didn't. Got killed.
Ha!
This is one of the most important conversations
in the canon of Fallout,
and there's also just tons of silly shit
like randomly happening upon a talking cow
or finding a TARDIS or a crashed spaceship
with a picture of Elvis on an alien's corpse.
♪ All of it ♪
Wild Wasteland optionally
makes things a little bit weirder.
If you're serious about role-playing and realism
or just hate fun,
it's nice that you can avoid these things
by not picking this trait,
but it adds a lot of great stuff,
little references and in-jokes and comedic things,
most of which I don't want to spoil,
some of which are too obscure to bother explaining,
but I love it.
It's also really clever to make it a choice
so everyone gets the experience they prefer.
Half of this stuff is so weird
it makes sense it's optional.
Not everyone wants to reenact a Monty Python sketch
in the middle of some post-apocalyptic scavenging.
Am I getting mugged by three old ladies?
Oh, Veronica, no!
Wild Wasteland even references that mod
I mentioned earlier in the game's DLC.
Ah, I love this game.
Anyway, during the early questing
and prepping for the attack on the town,
you're going to level up
and get to choose your first perk,
and by the way...
♪
In his GDC retrospective on the first Fallout,
original creator Tim Cain talks about the impact
of perks on playtesting.
Uh, QA loved that they could make characters
that were different than, like,
the guy sitting right next to him in QA
and they could play the game very differently
because of it.
Here's a game design term for you.
Horizontal progression.
Vertical progression is when the numbers get higher
and, yeah, sure, numbers going up
can be fun and pleasing in its own way,
but giving someone a new power,
a new thing they can do,
is usually way more rewarding.
They actually came up with perks
to give players more to do when they level up.
Brian Fargo took the game home,
played it for a weekend, came back,
and said, I love it except when I go up a level,
skill points aren't enough for me to do.
In other words, according to Fallout's original creator,
perks exist in order to make leveling up
feel more substantive than just putting points into stats.
Pause for effect.
A lot of the perks in Fallout 3
just add more points into stats.
So you level up, you assign your points,
and then, oh, I guess I can put five more points
into science and medicine,
or I can put five points in small guns and repair.
Oh, I can put 15 points into big guns.
That almost makes big guns a feasible skill
that doesn't need deleting from the game.
Do you like when the numbers get higher?
I hope you do.
Could I have a more interesting
form of progression, please?
I mean, let's be fair, there are some good perks
like animal friend.
So certain animals,
even some of the really dangerous ones,
will just hang out with you now
or even defend you in battle
if you take it twice which is cool.
Black Widow and Lady Killer are pretty nice too.
It's certainly better than having five more sneak
and lock pick. Come on.
First off, literally all of the boring perks
have been deliberately removed from New Vegas.
Like, there were so many and they're all gone.
It's like you can tell someone
who knows what they're doing looked at Three's perks
and said, these ones are bad. Take them out.
But here's the thing, right?
New Vegas gets to make its perks
way more interesting and cool
because they've changed the way they're used in the game.
In New Vegas, perks have more demanding requirements
before you can take them.
Meltdown is a ridiculously cool perk
that causes enemies killed with energy weapons
to explode in a burst of damage
which can often cause massive chain reactions.
Okay, that's a bit much to be honest.
This perk is hella horizontal.
Hella. What a great word.
It makes specializing in energy weapons feel amazing.
You're blowing people up left and right.
It's great, but you can only get this cool,
overpowered power if you have 90 energy weapons skill
which is a really steep requirement
especially considering New Vegas gives you
a lot fewer skill points per level
and you only get to pick a perk once every two levels now
which is how it was in the original games too.
That's another thing Three changed for some reason.
Cool perks are a reward for how you built your character.
Players are incentivized to plan ahead
and think about what sort of character they want to make
and what perks they want to end up with
which is intensely engaging.
Only one perk in Three requires a skill as high as 80
and most have no skill requirements at all.
There's a very real sense of progress
to building up a character in New Vegas
because perks add genuinely unique things.
Also, this is a small thing, but in Fallout 3
there was a perk that let you get
some more romantic dialogue
with characters of the opposite gender
so you could play a womanizing man
or a mananizing woman.
It also let you deal 10% more damage
to that gender for some reason.
I'm sure it was unintentional,
but the existence of these perks
implies Bethesda don't think gay people exist
in the Fallout universe which is quite funny.
New Vegas added a same gender version of the perk
so you could play as a gay character
or you could take both which at that point
gave you a 10% damage bonus against almost everyone
and was also a really nice piece of representation.
You were at that point role playing
a bisexual character in a video game.
In 2010, which was super cool,
I should have led with that and not the damage bonus.
♪ I'm going under ♪
Back in the days of Fallout 3,
people loved modding in more severe survival elements.
Fallout Wanderer's Edition is the most downloaded mod
for 3 by a pretty wide margin and it's a great mod.
It makes the game much more engaging and challenging.
It also came with a built-in alternative start option
so you didn't have to fucking do the vault again.
New Vegas gives players who like that sort of thing
an option built into the game.
On your way out of the front door,
you're given the choice to use hardcore mode.
It makes stimpacks heal over time
so you can't pause the game and get all your health back
in the middle of a fight.
You have to manage thirst,
hunger, and sleep now.
Companions can die which is terrifying.
Veronica, no!
And even bullets affect your carry weight now.
It really isn't messing around either.
In the middle of a normal playthrough,
I tried turning it on and suddenly I was at three times
my maximum carrying capacity.
I had to drop all this stuff just to be able to move.
Don't look at me like that, Veronica.
It's not littering anymore.
The world's ended.
This little extra optional realism
adds a lot to the experience
for people who like that sort of thing.
I'm personally a really big fan
of when developers add things into games
because they know that people would want them there
and mod them in if they weren't.
Like, people also modded iron sights
into Fallout 3 a lot.
Fallout 3 didn't have iron sights for some reason.
It just zoomed in a bit.
But guess what?
New Vegas has iron sights now. It's great.
In fact, this actually reveals another problem
with Fallout 3's design.
You can't aim down the sights of certain guns
that were made for Fallout 3
because whoever designed them at the time
forgot to put sights on them.
Like, they didn't think about how a person would use them.
Look at the laser pistol, for example.
There's just, like, a nub and a little rail there.
What am I looking down?
Here's the laser rifle.
It's a pretty nice-looking gun,
but it wasn't built with consideration
for how a person would actually use it.
In third person, when you right-click,
the character doesn't aim down sights animation,
but there's no sights there. What is she doing?
Bethesda noticed this too
because they redesigned laser weapons
in 4 to have sights on them.
Another thing people frequently modded into Fallout 3
was the ability to upgrade and modify weapons.
That's a bit of a confusing concept.
Modding in weapon mods?
The base game in New Vegas comes with the ability
to modify weapons.
Now you can upgrade and customize
your equipment. It's great.
Hilariously, one of the mods for the laser weapons
is working iron sights.
This is the weapon upgrade version of a subtweet.
Combine that with the fact there's way,
way more weapons in New Vegas
and different ammo types for the weapons too,
and all of a sudden you have so much more room for choice
in how you build your character and what weapons you use.
Optimized ammo, baby!
Okay, I got distracted there and talked about
a bunch of other stuff,
but that's because New Vegas is so good
at tying everything together.
The opening quest at Goodsprings
is a really well-designed introduction
to the ways the character you've built
and your skills and traits and perks can be used
as you prep for the town's big battle,
and the final thing it has to teach you
is that being the good guy isn't the only option
because you can align yourself with the gang
and help them take over the town instead,
and this gets you cred with the gang
which can really help you out
with a lot of stuff later in the game.
The story is essentially this side quest
in slow motion with larger stakes,
a series of preparations for the second battle of Hoover Dam,
a battle in which you get to choose a side
and recruit others to your cause,
and now even playing through the story the first time,
the player knows what kind of choices
to expect and prepare for.
It's a tutorial, but without telling you it's one.
It's very sneaky.
It's a bit like how in S.T.A.L.K.E.R.
Clear Sky you, what are you doing?
Get your hands off me!
Anyway, now that I've created my ultimate warrior,
I'm ready to march straight north to New Vegas
and have myself a grand old time.
There are some radscorpions in the way,
but that shouldn't be so f-
Oh, they're really resistant to my-
Oh, Jesus!
Ah!
Okay, so to go through this pass,
I just have to defeat these tiny flies.
That should be fine.
♪♪
No!
♪♪
Aah! Aah!
♪♪
♪♪
Ugh!
Open world games where you can basically go
wherever you want right away are really hard
to give a meaningful sense of pace and challenge
to the point where most developers just give up
and make the game do it procedurally.
So they make enemies scale in damage and weaponry
in accordance with the player's level and so on.
This hopefully results in players being never given
insurmountable obstacles and never being too strong
that everything becomes too easy.
This is an okay solution,
but it's a solution to a problem created
by earlier design decisions.
I think a really useful pointer for this
comes up in original Fallout creator
Tim Cain's GDC retrospective.
He said, we don't care where people can go.
They can go anywhere they want.
If they go into some area that's too strong for them,
they'll get killed,
and then they'll learn not to go in there yet,
and they'll look forward to the challenge
of being able to go back.
In about a sentence,
Cain instantly sums up one of the most important ways
of giving open world games a solid relationship
with the player.
In Fallout 1, you can technically go
wherever you want.
In fact, just west of the starting area
is one of the final objectives,
and you can technically go there right away
and beat half the game.
However, if you try doing that,
you'll probably run into an eight-foot tall mutant
with heavy weaponry who can kill you instantly.
At least I made it further than Ed.
Now, you might call this a horrible way to die,
but I call it good game design.
It creates an immediate and direct relationship
between the player and the environment.
This is a harsh and deadly wasteland
that wants to kill you, and you know this now
because it literally has.
As you get stronger,
these areas become more manageable,
and you get to tangibly feel stronger
because you know how dangerous this is.
Blowing up the super mutant base
after all the times they blasted your body in half
or casually killed your entire party
feels like a real achievement now.
In Fallout 1, finally killing your first Deathclaw
is so satisfying because the first time you meet him,
he ruins you, but hours later,
you're finally ready for more,
and he still kills you because it's Fallout 1.
Try knocking him down first. That usually helps.
Oh, and don't use melee weapons.
This was a terrible idea.
These encounters with Deathclaws and mutants
sound unfair, and yeah, that's the point.
They give players a really textured view
of the game's landscape.
It influences the entire experience
to a tremendous degree.
When the Gunrunners say they're having trouble
getting weapons out to people
because of all the Deathclaws nearby,
you really feel for these guys.
You know in ways that are only possible
for someone who's been killed by one before
just how much it would suck to live nearby
a nest of these things.
That's rough, buddy.
If Deathclaws and mutants
and other tough enemies scaled down
with the player to be largely doable
even at low levels,
Fallout would lose a huge chunk
of what made it so compelling.
Deathclaws would be just another enemy.
This game's sense of harshness
makes it immensely fun to play
because when you win,
it feels like you struggled for something.
People tell me other games are better
and insist Fallout 1 has aged,
but there's just nothing else in games
quite as intense as moving across
the northwestern side of the world map
in Fallout 1.
♪♪
Oh, for fuck's sake.
Fallout 3 broke pretty far from this formula
and that means it's bad.
I'm joking, obviously.
Bethesda just have a different ethos
when it comes to designing worlds,
one which I actually think is quite nice
in its own way.
They want you to be able to go on tour
of their majestically massive maps
and serious spikes in difficulty
would get in the way of that.
I've spoken for an embarrassingly long amount
of time about a game I thought wasn't that great,
but an important thing to remember
is that if you approach it a certain way,
there is fun to be had in 3.
Players who ignored the main quest,
which wasn't that much fun anyway,
and just wandered around dealing
with whatever they happened to find,
doing the occasional quest here and there,
those people basically made their own fun
with the game,
and Fallout 3's open world and dedication
to not making any areas too challenging
even for starting players was especially conducive to this.
You could walk around and go wherever
you felt like going.
Now, you can criticize how this was implemented
or whether it fits a game set in a post-nuclear wasteland
as well as it fits a traditional fantasy world,
but either way, it resulted in a wasteland
and rambling experience a lot of people remember fondly.
I can criticize the story and quests in Fallout 3
until I'm blue in the face, and I did,
but once my lungs recovered and I left hospital,
it didn't stop the fact lots of other people
still had a good time with 3,
wandering around and just checking stuff out
at their own pace,
battling raiders and super mutants
and deathclaws procedurally leveled
to never be too challenging to stop them
in their personal freeform tracks.
Bethesda went for a particular experience
and in a lot of respects, they nailed it.
Despite being built in the same engine as Fallout 3,
New Vegas has an entirely different philosophy
in mind when it comes to its world.
It's a bit more like a classic RPG
like Baldur's Gate or Icewind Dale
or, um, uh, Fallout.
It's set in a harsh environment
full of mutants and monsters and it means it.
Cazadors, I've heard some people call them cazadores,
so sorry if I'm saying it wrong,
are super dangerous.
Two of them can pretty consistently go toe-to-toe
with a deathclaw and against humans,
forget it, and they're used in a genius way.
Because they're insects, they make players think
of the incredibly early game bug enemies
from Fallout 3 that died in one hit
like radroaches and bloatflies.
In fact, right before you first meet them,
you pass through an area with bloatflies
to lull you into a false sense of security
and the landscape is perfectly arranged
so when you first see them, they're far away
and you assume they're small and probably weak
considering the nearby enemies.
By the time you get close enough
to realize they're really quite big,
you're already dead because they're about as fast
as the trucks they hit like.
This is the game playing a joke on you
by messing with your expectations.
The other route to New Vegas takes you
through Quarry Junction which has been shut down
because it's been infested with deathclaws.
The first guy you run into there says,
hey, buddy, uh, no.
You'd have to be the meanest, toughest,
roughest bastard in the wasteland
to have any chance against them
and I don't think that's you.
And these aren't Fallout 3 deathclaws.
They're somewhat manageable enemies that scale down
so even at low levels, they're not too hard.
These guys will kill you instantly
and they do not care if you wanted
to do some sightseeing here.
Uh!
Being absolutely obliterated at the start of the game
might seem a little excessive but for me,
it's like being welcomed home.
Tons of areas in the Mojave Wasteland
will happily kill you if you go there unprepared.
You struggle and die and find new equipment
and level up and as you do,
you're given a very powerful sense
of actually getting stronger.
Fallout 3's heavy reliance on level scaling
and deliberately not making enemies too strong
solved the potential problem of players running
into enemies they weren't prepared for
by making everything too easy.
So the player can go wherever they want
but everywhere they go will be roughly the same experience
with little to no sense of danger or challenge.
You can walk up to a guy with a flamethrower
and beat him to death with a baseball bat
even at the very start of the game.
Getting stronger in Fallout 3 honestly sucks.
It makes a game designed to be easy even easier
and after a few hours,
the whole combat system is boring.
No wonder millions of people downloaded the mods
that make it harder.
In New Vegas,
you start out pretty weak and fragile
and this game's raiders are setting up
actual ambushes, hiding in hills with rifles,
utterly tanking the damage of early game weapons.
They're up on the ridge firing down at you
with grenade launchers
and they're setting traps for you on the road.
This one actually got me.
Okay, New Vegas is really amazing at using traps.
Fallout 3 had some good moments with these
but a lot of the time they felt like an afterthought.
Like someone looked at one of the many identical offices
they'd made that day and went,
this needs to be more unique.
Let's put some landmines in the middle of the floor
you can defuse easily.
There.
Level design.
If you have any peripheral vision,
90% of this game's traps are just free landmines and XP.
New Vegas really goes hard on making traps
actually feel like traps
like here with the traffic cone.
I forget about these and get caught
by at least one every time
or two because they're so well placed
that they're difficult to defuse
even if you know where they are.
Welcome to Nevada.
Look at these easy to disarm bear traps.
Oh, fuck!
They're even used for environmental storytelling.
Caesar's Legion are especially clever with their traps
and also immensely evil.
So in areas they've raided,
they're hiding landmines under bodies.
That's morbid.
What's fantastic is the game pauses in menus
so stuff like this can happen.
Oh, fuck.
Okay, ready?
Go, go, go!
No, my bones!
The game is never scared to mess with you.
In a cave, there's a locked gate
which needs 100 lockpick skill
and it has a ton of good stuff inside,
so master lockpickers get some great rewards for weight.
What was that sound?
And what perk did I just get?
That's the perk you get for breaking your limbs 50 times.
Oh, no.
Oh!
The loot boxes and hard lockpick check
distract you completely from the trip wire
attached to a grenade bouquet
hidden right behind the gate.
You can almost hear the level designers laughing at you.
This combined with the willingness
to put tougher enemies in your way
and make regular enemies just a bit more dangerous
and clever gives the world a real feeling
of being unpredictable
and the extra difficulty makes the game way more fun.
You've had a taste of the brick wall now
and it tastes great.
Being hard in places creates meaningful challenges.
It gives the player something to get stronger for.
Finding better guns is especially engaging here
because they might really be the thing
that makes the difference in combat.
I have a mechanical and emotional relationship
with this cool gun with the physics scribbled on the back.
This thing has saved my life in a few situations.
I love him and being deliberately too hard
in some places creates a sense of apprehension
and anticipation for what you'll run into next
and if you'll be able to deal with it.
This is a world where just by the wayside
there's an encampment of really strong robots
you're not ready to take on yet guarding some great loot
you might want to try for anyway
or which you'll want to come back for later
and now you have something to look forward to.
It's important to recognize here
that none of this is really too hard.
Quarry Junction isn't actually blocking you off
in any way.
You can sneak past the Deathclaws
or master the weaponry available to you
in the early game and head right to New Vegas.
It's fairly tough but that's what makes doing it so fun
and feel like a real achievement
and if you can't make it past them right now,
coming back at a higher level
with better equipment and some friends,
collecting their delicious eggs
so the nice lady there can perfect her omelet recipe,
it's just so satisfying
because these Deathclaws started out legitimately terrifying
and not, like, piss easy to kill
even at the fucking start of the game.
Holy shit.
The sense of growth is so staggering
and it feels amazing.
You really feel like the meanest,
toughest, the thing the guy said.
You know for real how tough these guys can be
and still are if you make the mistake
of fast traveling into the middle of an occupied area.
Oh, Jesus!
This is a crunchy, yummy relationship
to have with a game's world.
The early difficult areas and the other spikes
throughout the trip make the Mojave
into a truly curious and eventful place.
You genuinely don't know what to expect
or if you'll be ready for it.
The difficulty of the two shortest paths to Vegas
incentivizes players to take the long way around
which is more manageable and puts you more
on the trail of the man who shot you.
I mean, he's a guy in a suit with a 9mm.
He couldn't even kill you with that gun.
He's not taking Corrie Junction.
Going this way gives you quests
to learn more about who he is and where exactly he's headed.
This also introduces you to the main factions
you'll be dealing with in the Mojave
like the NCR and Caesar's Legion
and it has some companions to help you out.
Thanks for taking a chance on a naive young girl
from California with stars in her eyes
and a pneumatic gauntlet on her hand.
Using challenges only more advanced players
will be able to get past,
the game is giving beginners a strong gameplay
and narrative experience that helps them
get their bearings, get a little stronger,
and learn more of the details of the setting and plot.
And while there are quests leading you
through the main areas on the long way to Vegas,
what's great is you can find these places
without ever needing to follow a quest marker.
To make the journey feel more like a trip
you chose to go on with places
you just happened across on the way,
the developers have used really clever world design
to make its key locations stick out on their own
and naturally attract players.
You can get sent to the RepCon facility
as part of the main quest,
but you might also find it by yourself.
It's a huge rocket silo with a big building
with a model rocket outside.
It's pretty easy to see it from elsewhere
and wonder what it is.
The story directs you to Prim,
but even if you ignore the story
and you're just walking around,
you're gonna see the huge roller coaster
and wanna go see what's up.
The game's just begging you to come in
and look around and find the other robot cowboy.
Yeah!
And when you're in the southern part of the map,
it's hard not to see the giant sculpture
of two rangers shaking hands
and go find the NCR base up there.
Fucking monument.
And almost everywhere you can see the Lucky 38,
one of the most important locations in the game.
The Strip is one of the few places in the world
lit up at night.
It's visible almost anywhere on the map
staring at you, waiting for you.
Oh, mate, where's me platinum chip?
Pfft.
One thing that we learned
by looking at Fallout 3,
they try to make sure that there's always
at least three landmarks visible.
The developers credit Fallout 3 for giving them this idea,
and there are some places
that really do visually stick out well in 3,
like there's Tenpenny Tower, Megaton,
uh, the big boy overlooking Paradise Falls.
Big boy man. I forget his name.
There's definitely some good points of interest here,
but New Vegas really pushes this into overdrive.
Maybe you didn't find Novak
because anyone in your travels
happened to mention Novak.
Maybe you just found a giant model dinosaur
and wanted to see what was up.
Head north toward Novak.
Look for a big dinosaur. Can't miss it.
Dinky the Dinosaur is based on two actual dinosaurs
out in the desert.
Well, not actual dinosaurs. They're models.
There's this one, Mr. X,
and the other one, Dinny the Dinosaur.
It's cute, but it's also inspired
by another real-life location.
Baker on the road to Nevada
is home to the world's largest thermometer.
Here I am in 2019 having a great time.
I mean, what did I expect?
It's literally called Baker.
I know it's named after someone.
So Dinky the Dinosaur also doubles
as the world's second largest thermometer.
Now here's the really clever thing
about making this cool place that sticks out.
This is where you continue the main quest
and find a potential party member.
No, not a building in the same area.
Literally this dinosaur.
If you go inside Dinky,
you'll find either Manny or Boone on guard in his mouth.
Using just clever visual design
by building a cool dinosaur,
the game is saying,
hey, come check this out, pal.
There's some fun stuff here.
Let's talk about how important
this kind of world design is.
Imagine four programmers on the edge of a cliff.
Game design works the same way.
♪ I waited but you must have lost your way ♪
Is there a plane going overhead right as I start recording?
Okay, it's gone. Right.
There's another big problem open world games
that give the player a lot of freedom have to solve.
Your game could have a bunch of great stuff in it
only for players to miss most of it
and get bored and assume there's not much to find.
I call this the onboarding problem.
If players can go anywhere and do anything,
how do you help them find all the cool stuff you made?
While quest markers and railroad-y stories
can help make sure most people find the core stuff,
what about all the side content?
I think a good case study here is Fallout 3
because like I said, 3 has some great stuff in it.
Some of the quests,
the superheroes in Canterbury Commons,
finding a violin for Agatha,
and deciding the fate of the Oasis
are interesting and often meaningful stories.
They're genuinely good quests.
If you can find them.
Pew, pew, pew, pew, pew, pew, pew, pew.
Fallout 3 has some well-designed quests
but its world design leaves a lot to be desired.
Many of its best locations are often strange places
that are hard for players to reasonably find on their own
and in many cases nowhere in the game world
ever tells you about them.
The Oasis is hidden at the far north edge of the map
and obscured by a bunch of rocks.
The only help the player is given in finding this quest
is there's this one weird sniper guy
in the middle of nowhere
with the address on his body if you kill him.
The Fallout wiki insists there are random encounters
that can point you towards it
so the game decides at random
if it's going to show you the cool quest.
There's a really good reason
why most players remember Tenpenny Tower
and that's because A, it's a big tower.
People are gonna find it, and two,
there's a guy in the first location you go to
in the main quest sitting in the corner going,
hey, come over here,
and he tells you about Tenpenny Tower.
Look, just tell people where the fun quests are
or at least don't make finding out about them random.
Canterbury Commons is a tiny town
in the middle of nowhere that's easy to miss
and the most interesting solution to the superhero quest
requires having found a page of text
on a specific computer
in a building on the other side of the world.
At no point does anyone or anything
mention you can do this.
I'm literally gobsmacked.
Ow.
Fallout 3 is a really fun game
to read the wiki about and find out how fun
it might have been if players could find
half of this shit while they were actually playing it.
There's very little onboarding to quests in 3.
The good content, which is in the game,
is effectively hidden from players
unless they happen to run into it
far off the beaten track.
The violin quest is great,
but starting it means finding a secluded house
in the middle of nowhere.
I've discussed this game with friends a lot over the years
and when I bring this quest up,
over half the people I talk to say,
I didn't know about that quest.
The only way to get involved
in one of the best things in the game
is to just happen to stumble onto it
in the middle of a massive wasteland
and a huge portion of players never even knew it was there.
It's such a shame.
Can you imagine making the best,
most heartfelt quest in the game
and discovering the surrounding world
was designed to make it incredibly difficult to find?
Whoever made that quest should be given a gun.
Fallout New Vegas uses a radical new technique
called game design
to ensure that players find all of its cool stuff.
Remember when I said six quests
send you to Vault 22?
That's just the tip of the questberg.
One of the many cool as hell locations in New Vegas
is the Helios One solar power plant
which the player can talk their way into
and initiate a quest to help get up and running
and then get to decide where to send the power.
In addition to being a giant cool building
with a big sign and a huge solar panel array
which is very easy to find just by walking around,
three other quests also take you here
while you're doing them which gives you an opportunity
to find this one.
For example, this guy, Michelangelo at Vegas,
gives you a camera and asks you to take pictures
of some cool signs he's heard of,
a quest which leads you to five locations
including Helios One.
Quests like this are basically the developers
handing you a juicy list of places to go
and stuff to do.
No wiki required, baby.
The game will show you a good time instead.
One of the game's companions, Veronica,
is a member of the Brotherhood of Steel
and if she sees enough interesting things
while traveling with you,
eventually she asks you to help her find some technology
which might help her change the mind
of the Brotherhood of Steel elder.
The computer which points her
in the direction of this tech leads you
to three different places
with their own solutions to the quest,
one of which is Helios One,
and another one, for the record,
is this guy's office where he sends you to Vault 22.
This game's quests,
in addition to being fun and interesting
and often thought-provoking,
are also designed to be found.
This ensures that players get to see
all the fun stuff in the game and,
and this is really clever,
it helps to create the sense of a cohesive world
because going to Helios One
has consequences for other quests.
One group we'll get to later
need to repair their solar panels
and if the player's been to Helios before,
they can mention they've been there
and salvaging some panels from Helios One
becomes an optional solution to the quest.
It creates a cool sense of taking part
in a cumulative and reactive story.
You're being given an alternative solution
to a quest specifically because you have knowledge
of a place with a bunch of solar panels.
I just can't get over how cool it is
that the player is never put in a situation
where they have to find the fun.
You can hardly go anywhere
without learning even more things
to chase up later or picking something up
that comes in handy somewhere else.
It contributes to what's still the most alive feeling
and reactive world there is.
I'm utterly astounded by wha-
Hello there.
Ah! Malcolm, you scared me!
This one random line from an NCR guy
really sums up New Vegas's design philosophy.
It's really hard to miss all of the great locations
and quests in New Vegas and that's wonderful.
The quest you get from visiting the dinosaur
is really cool too or should I say really ghoul?
I shouldn't.
Manny, a guy who has info
on the man in the checkered suit,
won't tell you what he knows until you go deal
with the ghouls at the rep contesting facility
and the ghouls there turn out to be a cool, weird cult
with a bunch of fun characters to deal with.
God, but are you ugly?
It's also pretty challenging in the early game.
It's a great place to get beaten to death
by invisible super mutants.
Helping them finish their rocket
and blast off to their supposed promised land,
making a last minute course correction
so they're more likely to get wherever they're going
before you activate the launch,
or maybe you want to play a fun prank
on your new friends, you little stinker,
is a really fun reward for coming here on its own,
never mind the fact it'll get Manny to help you,
and what makes this feel even more heroic
is the fact that I really was doing them a favor by choice
because you don't have to do this quest
to progress the story.
I mean, you could just talk him into telling you
or pickpocket the information off him
or kill him and get the same information off his corpse.
Or you could just check out his computer in his room.
I love computers.
When a character has a quest for you in New Vegas,
it's always optional.
It's really just an invitation
to take part in a cool quest if you want to.
Hell, even killing all of the ghouls
because you don't want to do their quest
and then coming back counts as far as Manny's concerned.
He just wants the ghouls out of there.
There are so many ways around doing this quest.
Okay, I'm done beating around the bush.
Let's talk about the absurd level of control
the player has over the direction of the story.
But first, don't forget to smash that like button.
♪♪
There's a fairly important character in Fallout 3
called Three Dog.
He has info on where your father went
and to get it, you either have to do
a really boring quest for him or pass a speech check
which you can still fail if you blah, blah, blah.
You've heard this bit.
But something I really like about Three
is that if you kill Three Dog,
this is for demonstration purposes.
Under no circumstances should you kill Three Dog,
before learning what he knows,
the game's main quest updates to say,
uh, all right, find your dad somewhere, I guess.
Good luck!
And you no longer have an objective marker
telling you where to go because you don't know.
This wouldn't be a super great quest to go on
since as previously discussed,
Fallout 3 has a significant problem
showing you where to find things,
but this willingness to let the player mess this quest up
this badly and account for that is still pretty cool.
The sad thing is Three Dog is one of the few characters
in the game that you can do this with.
Some of the Brotherhood of Steel members
right outside his office
are for some reason too important to die.
So if you nuke them all to take their stuff,
a couple of them just get back up
and aren't even hostile toward you.
After all, they need to complete
the main quest for you later.
The Brotherhood of Steel are just too important
for their part of the story to change,
so the game says no.
They're literally fucking invincible.
You can't even...ugh!
I'm having trouble believing I'm the master
of my own destiny here,
and I think this points towards an obvious solution.
Make it possible to kill all these characters.
Give the story ways of accounting for that,
but that would be an absurd amount of work.
Sure, it would be cool to have that level
of control and freedom,
but what sort of game could possibly...
Okay, so in New Vegas, you can kill everyone.
That's right. I didn't just mean you can kill many.
I meant everyone.
Everyone!
Except for children.
You have to wait for them to get older.
Oh, I'm coming for you, MacReady.
One of the game's most impressive achievements
is that even though its story is incredibly well-written,
it's also designed to account
for the player killing anyone in it.
Sometimes the plot does without characters in simple ways
like having notes and diaries on their corpses
in case they die.
Sometimes, though, it's incredibly complicated.
Like, if you kill Caesar, tons of characters
have things to say about his death.
Hey, you're the one who slayed Caesar.
That son of a bitch had it coming.
Wish I could have been there to see Caesar die.
What an asshole.
If we weren't in con territory,
I would kill you where you stand.
Caesar will be avenged.
And his death and the fact you killed him
are even things you can bring up in important dialogues.
Nobody springs back to life
because otherwise the story wouldn't work.
Don't want to do a quest for someone for information?
Fuck him.
Deputy Beagle needs rescuing
before he'll tell you where the man who shot you went?
Nah, that's all right. Good luck.
Don't like the imposing weirdo telling you
how cool the Legion is and then walking off dramatically?
Yeah, he's just too important.
If you shoot him, he takes a knee
and revives after a few seconds.
You can only kill him at the end of a really long,
boring, multi-stage quest.
Just kidding! Fucking blow him up!
He's dead!
He's supposed to come talk to you later
during the main quest and now the Legion
has to send someone else to do it.
The replacement even mentions they had to do this.
Your crimes against the Legion,
including the death of the fearless
Wulpes Inculta are hereby forgiven.
The level of choice you have goes much deeper
than this, though.
Once you make it to Vegas either
by taking the long way around following Benny's trail
or by getting there right away
by being a total badass,
you learn how pivotal the platinum chip Benny stole
is to shifting the balance of power,
and you fall into the multifactional struggle
for control of the Vegas Strip and the Hoover Dam.
Finding out who Benny is and getting
to the new Vegas Strip and meeting its master,
Mr. House, is just act one of the story.
The other two-thirds can play out completely differently
depending on which faction you decide
to align yourself with.
The NCR want to strengthen their hold
on Hoover Dam, recruit some outside factions
to help out, knock House out of the picture,
and gain control of New Vegas.
Caesar's Legion wants to weaken the NCR,
kill House, and take the dam and Vegas for themselves.
Mr. House, the Strip's current owner,
is a libertarian so he wants to lower the age of consent,
wants to turn New Vegas into a proper free economic zone,
and use the chip to make his robot army powerful enough
to kick both factions out.
You can even pick a fourth faction,
none of the above, and use Benny's pet robot,
Yes Man, to hijack Mr. House's plan for yourself.
I mean, Yes Man won't judge you.
Well, he will but he's not allowed to say it.
I'm gonna help you accomplish so much
whether I want to or not.
So you have all these factions prepping
for the Battle of Hoover Dam
and you're here figuring out who you want to side with
but even then, player freedom doesn't end
with the choice of what side to take.
Let's say you're doing the main quest for the NCR
and they ask you to help recruit the Boomers to their cause.
So you go to meet the Boomers and their leader is like,
okay, look, do some stuff for us and we'll think about it.
Ooh, help fix our power generator.
Oh, our solar panel.
Help me get a girlfriend.
Um, find my teddy bear.
Great, yeah, and then you're sitting through a kid
telling you his people's history
and you realize they're just awful.
Like, they're heavily armed reclusives
who want to live in seclusion forever,
viewing everyone different from them as backwoods savages
and whose ultimate fantasy is having the power
to blow up everyone who's foreign.
I wonder if there's some kind of social commentary
going on here with the, uh, Boomers.
You know what? I don't think I feel like
helping these people.
Yeah, that's right.
You can go scorched earth on these fuckers.
You can kill all these people,
annihilate their machines, raid their armory.
You can even tell a tiny child her bear is dead.
No, not Mr. Cuddles.
Wow, that's messed up.
You can do some evil stuff in this game.
♪♪
What's the word with the Boomers?
Have you talked to them yet?
I don't think it's gonna work out.
Sorry. Damn.
I guess we'll just have to do without.
And the main quest continues.
The thread of prophecy isn't severed.
This doesn't make the NCR's quest line impossible.
It just means we don't have that faction on our side.
It's great stuff.
One of the later quests is to make sure
the NCR's president doesn't get assassinated.
Seems to be going pretty well.
I think he's got this.
Oh, shucks.
I forgot about the sniper.
Well, that sucks.
What's next?
The game doesn't make you go back and fix this.
The NCR just continues preparing for the Battle of Hoover Dam
while down a president.
They're not happy about it, but this isn't a fail state.
You can continue.
Doesn't make you look good, though.
Unless, of course, I was working for the Legion
this whole time and I was the sniper.
Ha-ha!
Hold on. I can do better than that.
♪
Oh.
Oh, man, I just love killing the president.
Um, my producer has asked me to remove this joke,
but I don't think she'll sit through the video to check.
But there's another really important element
at play here with the choices you're making,
and this is the thing that makes them fun
in ways I still don't think any other game
ever has come close to achieving.
It's a pretty simple topic.
Uh, human concepts of morality and political theory.
Okay, everyone open your Foucault to page 451.
Ahem.
Video games are like prisons.
♪
The war has arrived at the gates of Hilli...
No, not like that, like in the Friedrich Nietzsche.
The game asks moral questions, okay?
It's fun to be evil sometimes.
Everyone's blown up a Megaton at least once
to see the explosion graphics and then loaded a save
or watched someone else do it on YouTube.
♪
When I was trying to record this scene,
the game crashed twice.
So that's good.
Lots of games let you theoretically choose
to do a bad thing, and it's nice to have the choice,
but be good and be bad
aren't incredibly meaningful decisions,
and when the choice is between a binary good and evil
with maybe a sarcastic or neutral option or whatever,
most people are generally gonna go
with what makes sense in the story,
which is usually just good,
and if they're feeling spicy, sarcastically good.
This isn't just me saying that either.
It's a science fact.
The Mass Effect games, for example,
reported back to Bioware what choices people made,
and according to designer John Ebinger,
92% of players picked Paragon choices,
the goody two-shoes nice guy options.
Lots of players say they went back
and tried the Renegade stuff on later playthroughs
and enjoyed it, but the issue here is not many players
over the course of a normal playthrough saw that choice
and went, yeah, I should do that.
Barely anyone thinks deliberately letting
the entire galactic government die, for example,
is a good idea.
We all kind of know that's the bad thing to do.
So yeah, a handful of players will go back
and see what the consequences of that choice look like,
but in real life, very few people tend to go around
going, I'm gonna be a bad person just to see what happens.
I know it might not seem like that sometimes,
but moral choices in many games amount to
would you like to be good or bad,
which isn't really an interesting question
to be asked and which most players
seem to answer with, uh, good, I guess.
This is a bit of a problem.
If players are being put in situations
where on the whole, most of them are going
to make the same choice,
they're not really being given an interesting choice.
Video games are more engaging when they ask you
something you have to think about.
To give an example, in one quest in New Vegas,
you'll notice the farmers at some NCR-run farms
are complaining about not getting enough water
and at risk of losing their jobs
because they can't meet their crop quotas.
If you look into it, your search leads you
to the parts of New Vegas that aren't run by the NCR
where independent folks have successfully started
a cooperative farm growing their own food
to help support themselves and prevent the NCR
muscling in under the pretense of feeding everyone.
A farm in the Wasteland is obviously a great thing,
especially if you don't like the idea
of the NCR running the place,
but if you do a little digging,
you learn the farm is run with the help of water
someone is siphoning off from the pipes
meant for the NCR farmers,
and the player has the option of telling on them
and having the water cut off.
So what is the actual right thing to do here?
Are you supposed to shut it off and let a farm die
and its people suffer because someone
technically stole the water,
or are you supposed to let the NCR's farmers
not get all the water they were promised
just because you don't want to cut off someone else
who isn't even supposed to be using it?
Also, it's a bit more complicated than I let on
because an NCR soldier had been looking
into the water shortage and went missing.
When you talk Tom Anderson into admitting
he stole the water, he also admits he killed the guy
when he found out to try to cover up the theft.
Turning him in for his crime means the water
will be cut off for sure,
and West Side will suffer greatly.
The worst thing is, Anderson clearly regrets doing it,
and if you turn him in for this, it'll all be for nothing.
Alternatively, you can cover up the death
and pin it on a gang, but this means a murder
is never brought to justice, and if you do this,
later one of their farmers tells you he's heading back
to California because he's about to be fired
for not meeting a quota he can't possibly meet
with the water he's getting.
Trying to help the people who need it more
ruins several other people and requires you
to help cover up a murder.
Even if a person decides what they think
is the right thing to do here, they still have to live
with the people who get hurt as a result of that choice,
and I'm sure there are players who think
they know the objectively correct thing
to do about the water in this situation,
but the point here is not everyone
will agree on what that is.
You as a person have to choose
what you believe is the right thing to do.
This is incredibly involving because it makes
the player actually think about the world
and their impact on it.
There's no huge far-reaching consequences
for this decision like the death
of a town you could have visited.
There's no secret better solution as a reward
for happening to visit the one computer in the world
with relevant info on it.
The game doesn't need gimmicks like this
to make the quest engage with players
because at its core is a really interesting question
which requires the player to decide for themselves
what the right thing is.
This is more than a chance to be good or bad
and see what happens.
It's an opportunity to figure out
how you would really act in a situation like this,
and questions like this are happening
on a constant basis here.
Is it a good idea to preserve incredibly dangerous
but potentially useful research
by putting it in the hands
of a self-interested politician?
Who should receive the power from Helios I
if you get it up and running?
The people who need it most?
The people the NCR tells you to give it to?
Or maybe everyone should get a little bit
but not really enough to help anyone.
There's even a really tantalizing selfish choice.
A kid on the streets of Vegas sells you a toy gun he found,
and if you're paying attention,
the gun is actually the targeting system
for an orbital laser which you can power instead.
So now you can do this.
♪
Boom!
Ha ha ha ha!
Half the country has no electricity.
Euclid's Seed Finder is such a great weapon.
I love it so much.
It comes in really, really handy.
It's great for taking out huge hordes of dea-
Come on, come on, oh!
♪
Ha ha ha ha!
I utterly love the game's ability
to give you the freedom to do whatever you want
including just killing everyone in the wasteland
and being done with any sort
of traditional questing whatsoever,
but simultaneously offers a story experience
to its quests that leaves room for you
to figure out what's right to you.
When the NCR tell you to recruit the Boomers
and you meet them and they're a bunch of messed up weirdos
who all pretend to remember Woodstock
even though none of them actually went,
you have to ask yourself if you think
recruiting them is a good idea.
Is their help worth getting their facilities
back up and running and getting them a weapon
capable of realizing their vision?
Or is this compromise necessary for the greater good?
Or could working with the NCR give them a chance
to open up and develop a healthier relationship
with the outside world because doing quests for them
isn't the only option to progress the story.
You have plenty of chances to ask yourself
how you want to deal with them.
Well, spoilers, this is footage
from my evil Legion playthrough.
They don't give a shit what faction you're aligned with.
Once you do a few things for them,
they'll work with NCR or the Legion if you ask.
Sure, we'll depose a democratically elected government.
It's basically all we do,
but first how do I change the wallpaper on my phone?
Later the NCR tell you to wipe out the Great Khans.
The Khans are a nuisance to the NCR
and have an allegiance with Caesar,
but it's a shaky one.
If you know the Legion, you know the main thing they do
is conquer other tribes and annihilate their identities
so you can start talking their leadership
into not wanting to work with Caesar.
The fact you can use pretty simple diplomacy
to get the Khans to change their minds
is a pretty serious criticism of the NCR.
I mean, they just asked you to kill them all for them.
They're basically an organized family
of drug-dealing raiders,
but does that mean it's okay to wipe them all out?
Will you do what the NCR wants
to help them hold the Hoover Dam?
And in the big picture, which faction should you side with?
What's the right answer?
I think the degree to which these questions
are compelling is evident
in how much longevity they've had.
I've seen people argue online for a decade now
that the independent route
is the only morally good option,
and I've also seen others say those people
are naive and doomed to be destroyed
by the much larger factions,
and it's better to do your best to support the NCR
and try to help them improve
because there's no other suitable
long-term power structure,
and for all their problems,
pissing them off and going rogue
is not a real solution to the fact you don't like them.
Arguments about sides in this struggle
are often deeply heated
because they tie into people's actual understandings
of the world around them,
their socio-political beliefs,
and their personal sense of pragmatism.
Being questioned on these levels by a computer game
is basically still largely unheard of.
The rare occasions a game really goes
for exploring these ideas,
it sweeps the game awards
and instantly becomes a modern classic.
Meanwhile, other games are still in the paddling pool
of, like, oh, was it bad to murder a bunch of people
with a knife?
A lot of people think politics
can be a turn-off for gamers,
but I've done some research and discovered
that politics is objectively fun
and all gamers love it all the time,
and the people who say they hate seeing them in games
actually love politics even more.
They just wish they were seeing different politics.
This might just be my opinion,
but I think it's good when video games
are about something and have ideas.
No one's going to rethink any aspect of their life
because of the story of Uncharted sponsored by Subway.
There's a reason why the best narrative games
are made by people who take big ideas seriously enough
to actually reckon with them.
The kind of people badass enough
to name drop Marx and Engels in their victory speech.
And Marx and Engels for providing us
the political education.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
You don't see stuff like that normally
at hashtag the game awards.
Also sponsored by Subway.
Fresh indie game presented by Subway.
Fresh indie game?
More like eat fresh indie.
Ah, fucking slit my throat.
Clear cut.
Wow, can you tell I'm from Yorkshire?
Clear cut good versus evil choices are easy
and require little to no thinking.
So no matter how fun it is to be evil in your game
or how nice it feels to be good,
the moral decision itself isn't engaging.
When you give someone a choice
where there's no easy right answer
or where the right thing in the situation
is complicated enough that different people
will have different answers,
you've given people something
truly gripping to think about.
The NCR seem like the obvious good guys
compared to Caesar's Legion,
a fascist tribe of ancient Rome cosplayers
going around crucifying and enslaving people,
but half the game is spent dealing with the fact
the NCR just aren't that great either.
A lot of areas here are independent
and really aren't into the idea of being annexed
by these outsiders coming in
declaring themselves the government.
Towns like Goodsprings and Prim
don't stay independent for long,
not if you've got something the NCR wants.
One of the first characters you meet, Sunny Smiles,
says that she's heard a lot of bad shit about the Legion
but mostly from the NCR,
and as far as she knows,
they could just be making that up to justify being here.
The NCR are doing poorly in the region
because of a lot of internal politicking.
The Republic's senators want to keep their seats
and aren't interested in supporting an unpopular war.
The best troops are off fighting other battles,
including defending the interests
of the rich Brahmin barons who have a lot of sway.
Almost every soldier or ranger you run into
has a story about being stretched too thin,
not having the supplies they need,
the enemy being stronger than they were told.
The horribly understaffed correctional facility
has long since been taken over by its own prisoners.
Their quarries are full of guys sitting and waiting for help
because no one's dealing with the Deathclaws.
There's, like, five different gangs of raiders in the area,
so they're not really keeping the peace too well.
They just don't have the manpower
to deal with all these problems.
The fact there are so many quests you can do for them
is actually a really important plot point.
They're so overrun, they're farming out stuff
that needs doing to whoever comes along
and offers to lend a hand.
The NCR are certainly not doing a good job
of proving that their society works,
and it's not like they have clean hands here anyway.
One of the main reasons the Khans are willing to join
with Caesar to fight the NCR
is because the NCR massacred a bunch of them.
The Khans haven't been the good guys
in any of the Fallout games,
but they have a lot of legitimate grievances
and reasons to want to harm the Republic.
For the supposed good guys,
the NCR really love killing and subjugating
anything in their way.
Over on the western side of the map,
they're hiring mercenaries to harass
the peaceful super mutants into a fight
so they can justify killing them off
or driving them away.
The NCR's the biggest gang of thieves in the Mojave.
Only difference is they pass laws
to make their crimes legal before they commit them.
Almost every group in New Vegas
is attempting to rebuild the world
in the image of one that came before.
The NCR are obviously emulating the United States,
a society that had its upsides, sure,
but which also destroyed the world
and in the game as well.
The NCR's problems are mirrors
of real world society's problems
because that's what they're trying to build
and doing their best to replicate the power structure
of a society that ended in nuclear Armageddon
is a bit of an ambiguous idea, isn't it?
Democracy's good, but this entire series
is all about the, well, fallout
of that system's failures.
If you want to see the fate of democracies,
look out the windows.
If you decide to help them,
you have to compromise your values
in the hopes that eventually they'll work things out.
I think this is a reason why so many people
think the independent option is better.
Like, if you're going your own way,
you don't have to answer to these fuckers.
Caesar's Legion, on the other hand,
are a really interesting faction
because despite being basically awful,
the more you learn about them,
the more you understand why they're like this.
Caesar is obviously trying to rebuild things
more in the image of ancient Rome,
a society which, for all its problems,
lasted a long time in some form or another
and also, minor point, didn't destroy the entire world.
The early Romans built a civilization
out of what was basically nothing,
and in a world where technology and culture
has all been blasted back to square one,
using one of the first properly successful societies
as a blueprint for starting again isn't the worst idea.
Caesar makes the case that his autocratic,
brutal dictatorship is the best method
of surviving and thriving in the wasteland,
and he makes some really interesting arguments
why this is the case.
He cites ancient Roman history
and even Hegelian dialectics in his defense,
and this is a really fantastic moment
because of how many layers it has.
Firstly, a game being willing to engage with players
on a philosophical level,
even going as far as invoking the work
of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Maser Panhegel,
is just wonderful,
and it's so much more thought-provoking
than anything I'd come to expect from games
at the time when I played it,
but then there's the question of whether you agree
with his interpretation of that philosophy.
Is he just trying to sound clever?
Does he really think he's that smart
because he's read a few books?
He even drops historical references
to Fallout's events as well.
Tandi, a character you met in the first two Fallout games,
essentially made the NCR what it is
and served as president for 50 years.
By the way, the group you rescue her from in Fallout 1?
They're the Khans.
The NCR has been having to deal with these guys
since before it even really existed,
and you know what?
It was weird that she was still president
by the time of Fallout 2.
Caesar points this out.
He makes the point that the NCR worked really well
when it essentially had a strong leader
no one dared oppose,
and the infighting and corruption that emerged
when she died would have been avoided
if they just had dictators.
This is an actual salient criticism
of liberal democracy.
Say what you want about fascist autocracy,
but at least it means a bunch of ignorant people
can't accidentally vote in a moron
and completely destroy their society.
Instead, you have one strong, charismatic leader
destroying your society.
Every member of the Legion besides Caesar
has a horror story about how they ended up here.
Broke us by throwing our dogs on the fire.
Lucius, the head of Caesar's Praetorian Guard,
happily tells the story of his tribe
being conquered by the Legion.
The women of his tribe were turned into slaves
and all of the men and boys
who weren't fit for the military were killed,
and he's completely fine with all of this
because he's been told to believe since that day
that this made him more civilized.
Lucius has been made into an obedient servant.
He isn't even capable of recognizing
that a wrong was done to him and his people.
Perhaps the Legion's greatest evil
is that it convinces some of its worst victims
it did them a service and to make them do it
to others in its name,
but forcibly integrating conquered peoples like this
is arguably why they're such a successful
post-nuclear society.
They violently make people obey them
in a way that creates a very particular kind of,
well, peace.
Caesar's camp has a trader in it
who loves trading in Legion territories
because their lands are safer than the NCR's.
There's no raiders or criminals,
and that's a problem you've experienced firsthand
for the whole game.
The NCR are so poorly run
that when you commit a crime,
they send you to a really lax prison
and give you a bunch of dynamite to break out with.
The Legion's brutality
keeps everyone in their territory in line.
What's great about this is it's simultaneously
a criticism and a defense of the Legion.
You know, they're bad and they crucify people,
but at least there's no crime.
Can't argue with results.
Your bones.
But also it's, you know,
proof the Legion is terrible and has killed everyone.
The best thing is this is based on actual Roman history.
The ancient Romans saw themselves
as bringers of law and order to the world.
Peacekeepers, if you will.
Romans would frequently inscribe
peace given to the world on medals awarded
to soldiers serving the empire,
but here's a funny thing about history.
People tend to assume that Rome was this bastion
of morals and intellect.
Mostly based on historical records written by Romans,
their enslaved and murdered neighbors
might not have felt the same way about their ethics.
Tacitus, a Roman senator
and one of history's most important historians,
really famously has a quote from a chieftain
who fought the Roman army making this exact point for me.
They plunder, they slaughter, and they steal.
This they falsely name empire,
and where they make a wasteland, they call it peace.
The Legion keep the peace better than the NCR
and in a historically accurate fashion,
they do it by killing everyone.
Just as my namesake campaigned in Gaul
before he crossed the Rubicon,
so have I campaigned and will cross the Colorado.
By couching the Legion in actual history
and giving its leaders a comprehensive philosophy
and having people who feel like they benefit
from their actions, they stop just being
the bad guys you can join if you want
and start reflecting a real world view
that has a lot to say for itself,
and despite seeming like an absurd
and ridiculous faction, there's still a lot
of social commentary going on here too.
The Legion are actually a more scathing criticism
of a real world group than the NCR
because here's the thing about Edward Sallow,
a guy who just fucking called himself Caesar
because he read a book about ancient Rome
and decided it was cool and he could totally do that.
The guy's a larper. He's stealing valor.
He doesn't really know what he's doing.
He just thinks he's got a license to rule the world
because he knows what a Rubicon is.
Like the NCR, he idolizes a specific moment
in history he's decided is good
even though Rome fell apart too in the end.
Caesar's a really interesting criticism
of all the losers out there in the real world
who think they're smart because they've read
about ancient Rome. You know, the kind of people
who name their Discord server Athens
to make themselves feel a bit smarter.
The story doesn't pretend both sides
are equally as good. Relentless horrible murder
and crucifixion is bad actually.
That's literally how they killed Jesus
but by giving Caesar a lot more to say for himself,
actual arguments to think about and respond to,
this makes conflict much more involving.
You have to have reasons why you oppose
the ideas these people are putting forward
and even if you think they're wrong,
you at least understand why they think
their ideas work which is very strong characterization.
Project director Josh Sawyer
and lead writer John Gonzalez
did a really good job with making the Legion make sense
and this means siding with them is really interesting
because you can feel the difference
between working with them and the NCR.
It helps that so many quests for each faction
mirror each other so well.
At McCarran Airport, you're helping root out Legion spies
or you're helping those spies weaken the NCR.
Because the game has really laid the groundwork
for these conflicts and you have so much freedom
when it comes to how to take part in them,
all your actions within the story feel meaningful.
Man, I love preventing the assassination
of the president.
There, are you happy, cat?
I got both sides in there.
Your choices also affect your reputations
with the factions of the game
which massively changes the experience.
If you side with the Legion, at a certain point,
you can't even go too far into the strip
without a disguise because the NCR start fights with you.
To be fair, I did assassinate their leader
or in other playthroughs, maybe the Legion
are sending kill squads after me
because I blew up one of their most important commanders
and then kept shooting their soldiers.
These squads are nasty too.
Like, going to war with the Legion is not pretty.
It feels like a genuine consequence
to choosing to be hostile toward them like this.
Every single time their assassins turn up
and tell you you shouldn't have messed with them
and it's time to die,
the player is being given a reactive reminder
of the choices they personally made.
This is what role-playing games are about.
It's just great. It's also terrifying.
Oh, my God, he's so fast!
Thanks, Veronica.
Because there are so many different choices,
so many different ways of experiencing this story,
every choice that you make feels so much more genuine.
You really know for certain in this game
that this whole thing could have gone differently.
Since you're never being forced to do anything,
everything you do feels that much more personal
because on some level, you made a choice.
The player isn't forced to join the Brotherhood of Steel
as part of the main story.
You can choose to join them
if you want to steal all their stuff,
but the choice feels personal because you don't have to.
They aren't the main characters of the story here.
In fact, all the other factions ask you to blow them up.
Man, can you imagine having the guts to write a story
where all three of the game's big factions ask you
to kill the most iconic group in the series?
That's not how you write a Fallout game.
That's how you write the best Fallout game.
♪♪
♪♪
♪♪
♪♪
♪♪
♪♪
♪♪
♪♪
♪♪
♪♪
New Vegas strikes a perfect balance
between fidelity to the stories and groups
of the previous games and doing different things with them
and then adding new stuff to the setting entirely,
and this is admirable because it's apparently
very tempting to copy-paste things
for the sake of fan service or change things
in ways that come off as cynical attempts
to rewrite the story to be something else.
A great case in point here is bottle caps.
Caps became an iconic part of the early game's setting.
They were a really novel idea for currency
back in Fallout 1, but by Fallout 2,
times have changed.
The NCR have been making
their own money for years now.
Fallout 3 went back to bottle caps,
which felt really insincere,
like it hadn't invested much thought
into its world beyond borrowing
what seemed cool from previous games.
New Vegas, as a result of its creators
thinking about how its world would work,
has three different currencies
because the NCR are here, their money is here too,
and hey, look who it is on the $100 bill.
It's Tandy. That's really cool,
but it's not been adopted into the mainstream.
They don't run the place yet,
and a lot of people don't trust their money
and still use the caps that were used in this area before.
NCR people only pay you for doing quests in NCR money,
which they mention is worth less than it should be here
because people don't fully trust it.
The NCR's money is almost a threat.
They're insidiously making their way into Nevada,
and as the Legion creep their way west,
their money's here too. Ugh!
The game is using currency
to show the developing tensions and politics
of the post-post-nuclear world.
How cool is that?
By bothering to write explanations
and justifications for their setting,
New Vegas gets to have its caps and eat them too,
and what I love about this game is it puts
an equivalent amount of thought
into every other aspect of the series' canon.
The Brotherhood are given a treatment
befitting their belief system.
The Brotherhood of Steel's purpose in Fallout games
has been to hoard technology in their bunkers
in case the future needs it, which is cool,
but canonically, they've been doing that nonstop
for hundreds of years.
At a certain point, they're just hoarders,
so by now they're in hiding,
living under permanent lockdown
after losing a ton of people battling the NCR
over Helios One.
Almost every faction wants you to dispose of them
because they're just not worth dealing with,
but once you get inside, you find out
they're having internal struggles
over the future of the chapter,
and one possible way of saving them
requires a ton of work,
but it allows them to get over themselves a little
and lift their lockdown and declare a truce with the NCR.
It's really beautiful how much of a struggle it is
to get them to change their ways
and how small a part of the story they manage to be.
These are the guys who normally end up on the box
of Fallout games with less original things
to say for themselves, and here they are
playing a tiny role in the main story,
living an existence that comments on their behavior
in previous games.
If you find their secret base
and try to get in with a password you found
on the corpses of one of their patrols,
they capture you and put a bomb on your neck
until you prove that you're trustworthy,
and then they send you all around the world
doing busy work for them
before they even consider making you a member
and hearing you out on a truce with the NCR,
but you know what's really cool?
When you first come here,
you could have a companion with you
who's a member of the Brotherhood of Steel.
Hold on. I've got this.
So instead of getting captured,
you get the best scene in the game.
We gave you a password, Veronica.
It's for your safety.
I know where you live, Ramos.
Open up.
For Pete's sake.
Opening up.
Welcome back, Veronica.
And this skips the quest they make you do with the bomb.
They actually thought about what would happen
if you had Veronica when you came here.
It's great.
And speaking of Veronica,
her quest to try to get the Elder
to rethink the direction of the chapter
is truly fascinating
because no matter what technology
you help her find, she fails
and has to decide whether to remain
with the only family she ever knew,
supporting them even though she feels
like they might be doomed
or try to make a new life elsewhere.
Come on. I can't listen to this anymore.
The player doesn't have control
over whether Veronica succeeds in this situation.
Instead, their control is so much more personal.
Through how they talk to Veronica
about these ideas during the course of the quest,
they help Veronica decide what to do with her life.
This story is so personal and thoughtful and sad,
and it's a way of looking at the Brotherhood
and its members' relationships
that's completely unique.
And speaking of doomed,
technologically advanced factions,
I really like how the game treats the Enclave.
The Enclave were destroyed in Fallout 2,
uh, despite what some games will tell you,
and even though they're an iconic and cool faction,
they keep them destroyed here.
The Remnants are just a handful of old people
who happened to survive the fall of Navarro
and have at this point been out of it
longer than they were ever in,
but if Arcade Ganon,
a really cool companion character by the way,
trusts you enough, at a certain point he tells you
he's the son of one of the Remnants
and you and him can recruit the rest
to take part in Hoover Dam
and help Arcade decide how he should feel
about his relationship with his father's old crew
along the way.
The story involved here
is simultaneously really epic
and goes really deep into the lore
of the Fallout universe,
but it's also about this guy figuring out
where he stands with his history.
And at the Battle of Hoover Dam,
along with all the other factions you recruited,
the Remnants triumphantly turn up
in an old Enclave vertibird
and wearing the few suits of Enclave power armor
in the whole game world,
and they help in the fighting.
Seeing the survivors of the Enclave,
making this very small and easy to miss
appearance in the game,
giving them the chance of a small sort of redemption,
it just feels so good.
Also, this is a really small thing,
uh, but it meant a lot to me.
Um, Ganon and Veronica are both gay
and it barely comes up.
Like, it's a small part of their lives,
and that was a really big deal to me
playing this game when I was a bit younger.
I don't know. That really spoke to me.
Um, thanks.
The Super Mutants are given really thoughtful use
throughout the game as well.
They're so cool,
even though their stories are mostly sad.
Most of them are hanging around in Jacobstown,
separated from the rest of the world.
Nightkin were a big deal in Fallout 1,
invisible Super Mutants,
some of the toughest enemies in the game,
but they haven't really got much of a look-in
in future games until now.
Addiction to and withdrawal from
the dangerous ancient technology
that powered their invisibility,
Stealth Boys, is seriously affecting their minds
at this point, and many of them don't even like
being looked at by people.
I really like how every fight with Super Mutants
in this game is justified and understandable.
The mutants you fight at the Repcon facility
are losing their minds and searching desperately
for a shipment of Stealth Boys they heard
were sent there by accident long ago.
You can talk to their leader
and find a peaceful solution,
but not if you killed too many of his friends.
Then you have to fight him.
If you play very straightforwardly,
you kill a bunch of mutants,
fight their leader who's obviously angry about this,
and then later discover the Stealth Boys
they came here looking for were sent back.
You kill all of these desperate people
and find out they came here for nothing.
It's so bleak.
A peaceful solution means sneaking past
the ones that are too far gone to be talked down
and finding this out for them.
Antler is sad, Shuman.
I can go now.
Find Stealth Boys in other places.
Even when you have to fight Super Mutants,
there's a story to it,
and you feel really sorry for them.
There's a Super Mutant companion
who has memories of her grandchildren
from long, long ago.
Oh, someone wants to hear Grandma's stories.
And who isn't taking her medicine
because she doesn't want to forget them.
Like, that's just so sad
and such an interesting thing to explore,
especially for characters who, in the previous game,
were used as enemies to shoot.
You just feel so human, you know?
Black Mountain is one of the other places
Mutants are hostile, at least to begin with,
and in addition to being really tough and heavily armed,
they're aggressive for a reason.
Their leader is deliberately positioning herself
as a new master and relying on the Mutants' desire
for a leader and ordering them to attack humans on sight.
There's a peaceful solution to this too,
and when you come back,
the Mutants are just hanging out.
I love Neil.
Neil is one of the first Mutants
you're likely to run into,
and he's written to be an introduction
to the more subtle and complex Mutants of this game.
He basically runs up to you and says,
hey, we know what you think,
but we have a complicated history.
Many of us are just as intelligent as basic humans,
and the rest don't really have any choice
in the matter, do they?
He's like a tutorial for players who expected Mutants
to just run around randomly killing people.
I really like how if you insult him
and then apologize, he's like,
okay, since you apologized.
Like, he doesn't just attack you
the instant you say something mean.
He's, you know, a character with motivations.
He's here because the radio broadcast
attracting more easily manipulatable Mutants
is obviously a problem,
and he's trying to send them to Jacobstown instead.
I just really love seeing Mutants
with comprehensible motivations and actions again.
I feel bad for any of the Mutants I end up fighting.
In one of the more slum-like areas surrounding Vegas,
there's a friendly Super Mutant hanging out
serving as the area's protector from gangs of raiders.
Hi.
There's no quests related to him.
He's just a part of the world,
chilling out, fighting bad guys, and being cool.
If I have one criticism of New Vegas,
it's I wish there were a few more
casual Super Mutant NPCs in the world.
Apparently there was going to be a Super Mutant NCR ranger,
but he got cut for time.
What the NCR does have though are ghoul rangers.
We won't go quietly.
The Legion can count on that.
At this point, pre-war ghouls are ancient,
and most of them are either really, really good
at what they do or bored as hell.
So they're serving as some of the NCR's finest
or working as top scientists
like the one that went to Vault 22
or the one at Jacobstown who casually mentions
she's made new identities for herself
and moved on when she got bored
with whatever she was doing.
They've really thought about how ghouls
would work in this setting.
I mean, how do essentially immortal people
live their lives?
It's really cool.
Raoul, a ghoul companion,
is a really good mechanic,
but that's just his latest skill.
On top of that, he has a lifetime's worth
of experience as an honest-to-God cowboy,
and convincing him to go back to his roots
makes him the best companion in the game combat-wise.
The game never rests on the laurels
of the existing setting.
It's instead coming up with ways to evolve
and add to the material.
Stuff that you wouldn't have expected at all
like an army of LARPers or New Vegas itself,
a glowing symbol of pre-war decadence,
and its robot security guards answering
to a man on a TV screen fit right in
and add to Fallout's greatest creative strength
which is the sense that anything
could happen in this world.
God, Mr. House, what a sweet addition to the story.
This character is voiced by the late, great
René Auberginois.
He knocks this character out of the park
while being even more literally a face on a screen
than the other characters.
Give me 20 years,
and I'll reignite the high technology
development sectors.
50 years, and I'll have people in orbit.
Also, and this is a small thing,
but I love that New Vegas 1-Ups 3's major character
turns out to be a computer twist.
John Henry Eden is on the radio the whole game
and talks about being the president of America,
growing up in Kentucky, and so on,
but then when you meet him, he's a computer.
It's sort of a twist, and New Vegas rolls around,
and Mr. House is a major player,
and people talk about him like he's a real person,
but you get there, and he's a face on a TV screen,
and he also insists he's a real boy
who has somehow been alive for, like, 260 years,
which, yeah, right, of course,
but then if you get into the basement,
you discover, no, he's a real person
kept alive in a pod hooked up to all these computers.
I just like the little double twist there.
Oh, and if you kill him, this triggers
a mass email obituary he wrote himself
detailing how accomplished he was
and how the world is screwed now,
but I guess when your faction is basically you
and your robot friends, you might start
to get a little self-obsessed.
Like, if you want to see how to make a Fallout game,
there's a lesson here.
Don't rehash the iconic stuff
everyone already knows.
Come up with something completely new
like a faction of robot security guards
who answer to a pre-war ultra-capitalist businessman.
Don't ask what the Fallout setting
can bring to your creativity.
Ask what creativity you can bring
to the Fallout setting.
I mean, the man who shot you, Benny,
is such a fun personal antagonist for the player.
He's consistently funny and surprising.
You can choose to forgive him,
and he seems sincerely affected by this,
but then he tries to have you killed again anyway,
but if he gets captured by the Legion
when you and him get a quiet moment,
he tells you his entire plan to take over the Strip
and says you should do it instead.
The guy knows he's done for,
so he hands you his whole scheme
so someone else can be his legacy.
What an interesting character.
If the Legion get their hands on him,
you can choose how he dies,
and I think it's fitting given all we've been through together
to take him on in single combat.
Just him and me.
Just make sure your companions
aren't positioned with a view to the arena.
Arcade, no!
And speaking of his scheme,
Yes Man, a reprogrammed house robot
who can be used to take his place,
is so cool.
I was programmed to be helpful
and answer any questions I was asked.
I guess nobody bothered to restrict
who I answer questions for.
That was probably pretty dumb, huh?
He's really judgmental of your choices,
but he's programmed not to be able to disagree
with anything anyone says.
Okay. Consider them forgotten.
Along with the projections that predict
they'll be our biggest enemy.
Forgotten!
John Gonzalez is completely killing it
here with this guy.
All of these additions to the universe
will make any future Fallout game
that doesn't include them or make similar levels
of additions of their own feel empty
and lacking in vision by comparison.
After New Vegas, the bar has been raised
so high that they should probably just
stop making video games now.
There isn't even time to get into the fact
you can actually gamble in the New Vegas strip,
or you can play Caravan,
which I definitely know how to play.
all gasp
gunshots
Those bastards got Ringo in the end after all.
What a shame. It just keeps being engaging
and thought-provoking right up until the very end.
♪♪
The final confrontation takes place
at the Second Battle of Hoover Dam.
The game's complex and branching story means
that you can be fighting on either side in this battle,
and even then you might really just be playing
the NCR so House gets what he wants
or what you want with Yes Man's help.
The end game feels like the ultimate reward
for all the other work you did.
If you fired up the Securitrons,
a huge army of them is here to help out.
If you've recruited the Boomers
to whatever side you're on,
they're out here blowing stuff up for you.
If you didn't deal with the Khans earlier
in some form or another, you have to fight them here,
and if you're fighting for Caesar,
they genuinely do turn up and help you out.
It's pretty cool.
The end game goes out of its way
to feel like the culmination of lots of choices you've made.
Although it is a bit of a steamroll
if you recruited everyone you could for the NCR,
that feels good too since it's a reward
for the work you did.
In any of the three main story paths
that end up siding against the Legion here,
you eventually fight your way to their main camp
where their commander is waiting.
Legate Lanius has been talked about for the whole game
as a ruthlessly dedicated leader
and incredibly dangerous fighter,
and he genuinely does command you
if you side with the Legion,
but the buildup to actually fighting him
after all this time is really cool and tense.
Before the final battle, he engages you in conversation.
You again.
♪♪
-♪♪
-♪♪
Okay, so maybe we should try talking.
An envoy of Vegas,
yet you carry yourself for battle.
If so, you cannot truly be of that city of cowards.
Oh, man, his voice is so good. He's so cool.
Lanius seems completely unwilling to back down,
so totally invested in victory at any cost
that he'd rather die than give up.
Even Caesar's death isn't enough to deter him.
If you try to talk him out of fighting,
he's very resistant.
Lanius' entire system of morality
is so different from yours that you can't just say,
no, please don't be bad.
To talk him out of a fight,
you have to pick choices
that actually convince him of something.
You can point out that even if he wins,
the sheer size of the Western territory
makes controlling both it and the East far too difficult
and would eventually doom the Legion as a whole.
Hoover Dam is but a place.
I will not have it be the gravestone of the Legion,
whether quickly or, as you describe,
slowly by attrition.
This is fascinating because it's based in actual history too.
One of the real Roman Empire's problems
was that it was too big to effectively control
without falling apart, and eventually it split in two.
There are other ways out too,
like using bluff to convince him there's a trap up ahead
or even using barter to convince him
of the lack of supply lines.
The multiple different ways of convincing him
is a really nice way of rewarding players
who approach the game differently.
I genuinely can't believe that they managed
to make barter one of the most useful skills in the game.
Lanius fulfills a real mechanical challenge
both in dialogue or if you fight him,
but he still manages to make sense as a person.
Even if you have 100 speech, after convincing him,
you can still say the wrong thing
and make him attack you again anyway.
This final big conversation of the game
feels super cinematic.
It's such a cool finale to the story,
made even cooler by the knowledge
that if you'd made different choices,
he'd be the guy you answered to
while you fought across the dam in the other direction.
Despite being really just a series of speech checks
in a dialogue tree,
the quality of the execution of this final encounter
makes this last conversation
feel like a real argument with a real person.
Then if you're independent,
you can throw the NCR general off the dam.
Ah!
♪ Play it again ♪
♪ My Johnny ♪
As of today, it's been ten years
since Fallout New Vegas was released.
Well, not literally today.
I wanted this video out on the day of the anniversary,
but come on, it's me.
We all knew that wasn't gonna happen.
My producer Kat carved an NCR Ranger pumpkin
back when we thought we were gonna get this out in October.
It's not looking so good right now to be honest.
It's one of these very special games
where there's tons of choices you could plausibly make
for how to resolve the main quest
and so many other side quests
with tons and tons of different endings
for how you interacted with every major faction,
and the amount of variation is fantastic by itself,
but when it really comes down to it,
its real success is that it makes those choices
so interesting and compelling
that I enjoy making choices I made already
just to see them play out again,
and sure, maybe graphically it's showing its age.
There's some bugs here and there,
and it has some issues getting running
on Windows 10 and high refresh rate monitors,
but when a game has this much to say for itself,
it manages to stay timeless.
This game really gives me hope in a way.
It's proof that games like this can exist,
and I can't wait for there to be another one like it.
I genuinely don't understand
how they made this game in 18 months.
One of the most magical things about New Vegas
is that even when it was done
and the developers could have moved on,
some of them didn't.
People like lead developer Josh Sawyer
have continued to be active.
Sawyer's been responding to questions
about the game on Twitter and Tumblr
for years after the game's release,
even now, in fact, justifying his decisions,
taking and responding to criticism,
going into detail about what went
into the development process,
doing charity streams where apparently he said
I was reading way too much into that smirk
that one time, and yeah, I really fucked up there.
What a dumb mistake to make. I'm so sorry.
I don't know. Maybe this is a bit naive,
a bit of a wishy-washy statement,
but New Vegas is great because at every given moment,
it feels like a game made by a bunch of people
who would happily spend ten years
answering questions about it in their spare time.
You know, I've never sat down and tried to figure out
what I think the best games ever are,
but I know for a fact that Fallout New Vegas
is my favorite game,
and it has been for a long time.
Honestly, I'm kind of getting bored
of waiting for other games to come along and beat it,
so, um, I guess for now,
I'm willing to say that Fallout New Vegas
is the best game of all time.
Let's start a new list right now.
Here it is, number one,
and I'm gonna update this with every game
that I ever mention in any of my videos from now on
so eventually we can have a list of every game
from best to worst since I'm gonna be doing this forever
and I will never die.
So there we have it.
Fallout New Vegas is objectively
the best game of all time,
and for that it gets my highest score ever,
84 out of 100.
It's been ten years,
but it honestly feels like it just got here.
Fallout New Vegas might sometimes
run out of memory and crash,
but that's only because there's so many moments
worth remembering.
Oh, my God, I left that in the script.
["Spring Days"]
["Spring Days"]
["Spring Days"]
["Spring Days"]
["Spring Days"]
Oh, thanks for watching all the way through, folks.
Um, I had a really good time making this video.
It's, uh, really nice getting to just gush about
how much I love a thing that is really close to my heart.
I'm sorry that I haven't made that many videos this year.
I meant to make more, but it's been a really tough year.
Um, I had a few projects that required me
to fly out to interview people and stuff like that,
and they all had to be cancelled when COVID happened
and people started getting sick,
so that's–it's not been ideal.
I got pretty sick too, but I don't think it was the virus.
I think it was something else.
God, even though the video's finished now,
there are so many things I'm like,
oh, I should have mentioned this.
Like, there's, like, so much stuff.
Like, the way they reworked how guns work,
uh, the way damage has been changed,
the reintroduction of damage threshold,
all that stuff. I mean, there's so many even, like,
really tiny things that really stick out to me.
Like, if Wild Wasteland is turned on,
then in the credits of New Vegas, uh,
Dead Money, the name of one of the DLCs,
is just Dead Monkey.
Like, just weird, cute little things like that
just constantly.
It's just really good.
Have you figured out that I like this game yet?
I have a couple of videos
that are really close to being finished.
In fact, one of them will hopefully be out
before Christmas,
and then I'm gonna have one done in mid-January, I think.
So, um, it's good to be back up to speed
and, uh, show people what I've been doing all this time.
Honestly, the video coming out in January
might be the best video I've ever made,
and I'm so annoyed that this video
took so much longer than I expected
because I just can't wait to show it off.
However, it's about an issue
which will be more pressing in January,
so it's almost like I planned it that way,
but it's not.
It was a terrible mistake,
and I wish I could have done sooner.
Anyway, I'm just rambling now.
Um, I hope you all have a good Christmas.
Tune in in, like, literally three days
when a video about Christmas comes out.
I'm not even joking. See you then.
Anyway, I guess that's it.
I'll see you all, um, in hell,
and thank you all so much
for watching the video all the way through,
and if you're a patron, thank you for supporting me.
Uh, it's been very nice being able to continue drinking
sparkling water even during an apocalypse.
Um, I have one of those soda streams
where you, um, you can take the canister back in
for a discount on a replacement canister,
and every couple of months, you know,
I put on a mask and brave the trip
to the one store that replaces the canisters,
and that's basically my only interaction
with the outside world right now.
I've noticed that, uh, the credits are obviously
quite long considering how long
I've managed to talk during them,
so I'm thinking of maybe doing some kind of thing
where people can send me questions
and I'll read them out in the credits.
Maybe, like, it makes sense instead of these rambles,
or maybe people like me just talking about whatever.
It's fine. Anyway, I'm gonna go watch Columbo
and take a nap, so, uh,
you all have yourselves a great evening.
♪♪♪
♪♪♪
♪♪♪
♪♪♪
♪♪♪
♪♪♪
♪♪♪
♪♪♪
♪♪♪
