So a couple months ago, I used YouTube's post feature to announce by way of a screen cap,
because it had to be a screen cap because the announcement was behind a paywall,
that I sold a novel to commercial fiction publisher St. Martin's Press,
Axioms, and a Stranger Things meets Arrival story set in an alternate 2000s about a young woman who
becomes the sole point of communication between humanity and a hostile alien civilization.
Okay, and so for you smartasses who are bagging on this, I did not write this. I honestly don't
know where they got Stranger Things. It doesn't take place in the 80s. It's not even like,
you know, magical metaphysical stuff. Is it on brand? Yes. Is it too long? Probably.
Can I pre-order it? Actually, you can. They got right on the ball. And I know what you're thinking,
like, oh, another one of those, you know? Here I have been slaving away at the great American
novel for decades, and another one of these YouTubers just has a book deal like foisted
upon them. The influencers sit recumbent on the chaise lounge and receive the offers.
When in reality, I have been working at this for 10 fucking years. Well, no, I don't mean literally
the same book for 10 years. It did not take me 10 years to write this. Well, I mean, sort of. Anyway,
we'll get to that. And the truth is, yes, it is a lot easier for some people with bigger platforms
to get book deals than others, but that also depends on the type of book that they are writing.
In the case of YouTubers and influencers, what publishers usually want is like, you know,
my life as a girl boss the book, or hi, I'm an Instagram model the book. But I was like, no,
I like suffering. I want to write novels. Better yet, of the science fiction variety.
You know, science fiction, that, that biggest piece of the publishing pie. Everybody loves it,
so in demand. It's not. So today I'm doing something a little different in discussing
how does one actually go about publishing a novel. I'm going to demystify the process.
Because I know a lot of people that subscribe to this channel are either creatives or aspiring
creatives themselves. You need to know what holy hell you're getting into and decide, can I handle
that many rejection letters? So how it works. If it's your first time, fiction and nonfiction
are handled generally quite differently. Nonfiction is generally sold on proposal,
meaning there will be between one and three chapters of the book written, and also you'll
have like a bio and then like some stuff about your platform and an outline of the book and,
you know, a section saying why I am the expert that should be writing this book. And with fiction,
again for debut authors that aren't famous, it needs to be done. The book needs to be 100%
written. Debut novels are very, very rarely sold on proposal. Outliers to the point of
should not be counted. Yes, I know it happens, but it doesn't happen very often. I mean a debut novel
might be sold on proposal if it's by like a celebrity or, you know, it's like a YA adventure
about like beating the system written by a YouTuber with more than 10 million subs, but,
you know, if that's the case, they're probably hiring a ghostwriter anyway. I am obsessed with
this shirt I got by the by Pantages the other day. The Cats trailer has sent me spiraling into
a severe Andrew Lloyd Webber relapse this fall. Anyway, yes, there are famous people exceptions,
but in general, debut novels are not sold on proposal. It needs to be done, and by done,
I mean it needs to be edited, it needs to be polished, it needs to have gone through several
drafts, and by the time you think you are ready to go, you are wrong. Put that thing back in the
drawer, take it around the block a few more times, it still needs work. Trust me. You have to be able
to look at this thing and go, yes, I could see this going to print tomorrow. This is the level
that we're at. The thing about writing, especially something as like sprawling as a novel, is that
writers are actually not very good at judging the merits of their own work. Shock, I know.
When the truth is, nine times out of ten, authors think they are ready to go before they are ready
to go. I know I was. We'll get to that. But now that you have written the thing, it is time for
step two. Get a literary agent. Arguably the hardest step, because this is the part in which
the odds are least in your favor. So you've submitted your query, you are now in the slush
pile, which is a very uncharitable name for unsolicited material, because most of it is
detritus. Yes, there was a time when authors submitted directly to publishers and they did
not need a literary agent. We call those times the 1970s. Yes, there are some exceptions, but for
your purposes, if you want to get published with a major publisher, and most small presses, and a
huge chunk of indie presses too, you need a literary agent. They won't even look at you if
you don't have one. And while we are here, no, you do not pay your literary agent before you sell
your book. They take a cut after they sell your book. If there is an agent saying that you need
to pay them up front, they're not an agent, they're lying. It's a scam. Run away. So what does a
literary agent do? Are they anything other than a glorified filter that exists to separate the
rabble from the publisher so the publisher doesn't have to waste their precious time and resources
anymore? Well... See, here's the thing. You are a special flower, an artiste floating along on the
winds of inspiration. You don't understand contracts. The publishing industry is labyrinthine
and complicated, and it has a culture that you do not understand. I know I don't. On top of that,
contracts have gotten a lot more complicated since the 1970s. Mine, for instance, was pretty
boilerplate, and it still took two months between selling the book and signing the thing. That was
a pretty quick turnaround. On top of that, agents also negotiate royalty rates and advances for you,
and also advise on what you should ask for in your contract, because they know what is standard
and what is reasonable to ask for, and you don't. But there is a creative element, too. A lot of
literary agents will actually do a pass, do some edits with you before you actually go on submission
to publishers. They also act as sort of a go-between between you and the publisher, you know,
so they can, like, soak up the emotions if you have too many, because it turns out you're not
supposed to yell at your publisher. They ask you how you are and you just have to say that you're
fine when you're not really fine, but you just can't get into it because they wouldn't have run.
So why are the odds not in your favor at this stage? Well, it's because of volume. It's hard
to find exact stats on this, how many submissions any given literary agent gets per day. My agent
gets between 15 and 20 per day. So depending on the size of the agency, a literary agent is going
to get anywhere from several hundred to several thousand queries per year, and depending on how
much they are trying to build their list, they may only take on half a dozen or less. So I'm not
saying you have less than one in a thousand odds for your basic midlist literary agent.
Actually, I am saying that. That brings us to step 2.5, the query letter.
Okay, so if you're a novelist, you're probably not very good at being concise,
but the query letter is basically a two paragraph less than 250 word pitch. It's basically the copy
you would read on the back of the book. It is designed to make the person reading it be like,
oh yeah, I want to throw down my 2795 MSRP for that. It's not a summary. You should not
summarize. It is a pitch, and it's actually really hard to do well. A bard, a mage, and a rogue meet
in a tavern, and then they hear of a quest. There's a business centaur that owns a company,
and he's just, he's living his life until one day a plucky young virgin
becomes his secretary or something. And then, oh, the past. Yeah, see, I'm really good at that.
So each literary agency operates differently, but in general the steps will be query letter leads to
partial request, which means part of your manuscript, like first five chapters or
something. If they like that, then they'll ask for the whole manuscript, and if they like that,
then they will offer you representation. Generally, this process will be protracted
over several months, unless you're just that amazing. Sometimes it can be really fast,
but usually it's not. Wow, you have an agent now. Good for her. Hopefully your agent will help you
out on the creative front too, because presumably they took on your project not just because they
thought they could sell it, but you know, because they like it. And the level to which they will
help you before you go on submission to publishers varies a lot. Like, it could be just like an email
with like, hey, maybe you should like brush this up, or like, you know, you use the word
basically too much. Or they could do like an entire line edit through your manuscripts.
Depends on the agent. Next top book deal? Well, not so fast. First we got to talk about who we
are submitting to. Generally, an agent will want to start with big five publishers, because they
are the ones with the money, and they are the ones with the best marketing and the widest distribution.
So what do I mean when I say big five? Well, basically they're the biggest five, but also
they are umbrella corporations effectively for many, many, many publishers. The big five are
Penguin Random House, Simon & Schuster, Hachette, Macmillan, which is mine, and HarperCollins.
The way it works is at the top we have the publishing house, then you have the publisher,
then you have the imprint. And the imprint is where the editor works. They are the one
that specialize in whatever it is you are trying to sell. For instance, my imprint is
Saint Martin's Press, which is an imprint of Saint Martin's Press, which is owned by Macmillan.
Imprints specialize in different things, so for instance you'll have Tor Forge, which specializes
in sci-fi and fantasy. Love Swept will be HarperCollins. Is it HarperCollins? No, it's
Random House. Well anyway, it's a romance imprint. Saint Martin's Press specializes in commercial
fiction, which obviously can mean genre fiction, but you know, a certain type. Let's just say I was
rejected for more than one genre imprint for not being sci-fi enough. It's a rival meets changer
thing. So big five publishers are desirable not just because they are able to pay advances,
sometimes very big ones, but also because they have much wider distribution. Generally you'll go
on a round of submission. You'll see how that goes. Maybe it'll sell on the first round, but if it
doesn't, you probably want to do some revisions before you go on round two, and then when you go
on round two and it doesn't sell then, then maybe you want to start seriously considering smaller
presses or indie presses or self-publishing or trunking it, and we'll get to that. Okay, so let's
say you are on submission. If there is more than one offer, then it goes to auction, and auctions
are great. They make you feel really popular, but most of the time for debut authors, especially if
they don't have a big platform, this process will be protracted over a period of several months.
So while on the one hand there are an ever-increasing number of options to get your
book out there, traditional publishing is actually more competitive than it has ever ever been.
Yeah, especially for fiction. And that leads us to my monstrosity. Ten years, huh?
That seems, like, sad.
There is this expectation when you work in a new media that people think that you're gonna be like,
you know what? I'm bucking the system. Screw you, gatekeepers. I gotta do me.
But no, no, that is not what I wanted to do. So this is a story about traditional publishing
and rejection and all sorts of fun things, and why I never talked about it. Till now.
So let's get this out of the way first. There's this sort of wrong-ish idea I see floating around
that if you have a platform of, you know, decently sized, that you're pretty much guaranteed a book
deal. And, uh, you know, wow. You know, that's not true. And I will find that people that even
work in the industry are surprised that, like, my platform didn't get me something much sooner.
Which inevitably leads to these dipshits on Reddit surmising that, like, well if you can't
get a book deal despite those YouTube subs, well, woof. Which just kind of reveals that these people
don't know how anything works, and that's fine. That's why I'm here. Fundamentally,
quality is secondary to where the market is and what they think they can sell. Especially for
fiction, a thing no one should write. Okay, so what did I mean by that? When I said this whole
big nonsense thing took 10 years, what I mean is it was about 10 years between my conscious decision
of, yes, I am going to pursue this thing. By this thing, I mean traditional publishing with a Big
Five publisher, and it actually happening. Was the novel I sold the first novel I wrote? No.
I'd argue that it wasn't even the second, but it was also kind of the first. I said it was the
first and, well, anyway. So I joke a lot about fanfic, but the truth is fanfic is actually
really good practice and a good way to decide if that is something that you want to pursue.
And I joke about it a lot, especially with the Phantom stuff, but the truth is I was not
terribly prolific until I was in college because I had this narrative about myself that, you know,
I just don't finish things. I'm just, I just, I don't have the attention span. Too bad for me.
I guess I'm just gonna work in data collection for the rest of my life because I'm 22 and I don't
know anything. But then, thanks to the wonderful world of fanfiction, I actually did start
finishing some stuff. You know, it wasn't good, but I finished it. So, again, this was around
the time that the, you know, economy crashed and I went to grad school. So going into film
and television, of course, that's where we're going to start making serious attempts. Because,
after all, there was no way in hell I was going to go into a creative writing MFA on the strength
of a few overlong fanfics. No. Going into debt at one of the most expensive film schools in the world
during the worst recession in living memory is a much better idea. So, yeah, we're at film school.
It's 2009. Part of the curriculum is let's come up with some story ideas. There's a class called
ideation. We have fun. So the first non-fanfic thing I wrote was this sad sack attempt at a
Christian romance novel because I knew someone who worked at the harlequin imprint for Christian
romance called Love Inspired and this imprint was one of the only imprints that was taking
unagented authors and I, in my infinite hubris, was like, anyone can do that! At least I got some
practice in. I did also write a full-length screenplay while I was at USC for a class. No,
it will never see the light of day because it was quite bad. But then I got an idea in 2012
that was rooted in some items that were in the news at the time.
How about that but with aliens? But no, I did not start writing it then. That did not happen until
2013 and I wrote the first draft in two months. It was one twilight long because I measure everything
in units of twilight. This is a twilight. This book actually has really big print. It's not that long.
That first draft was described by one person that I no longer speak to at the time as
publishable, which is probably a little bit of a red flag when the people in your life don't
really have the heart to tell you that your word baby is a bit of a yike. But I, in my infinite
arrogance, was like, we're off to the races. I very wrongly assumed that my platform, which
was much smaller than it is now, would make me a catch. So even if the book wasn't all that great
and sure as hell was not ready, it didn't matter. They'd help me fix it. I've got 20,000 Twitter
followers. I think I might have done like one very minor revision before I sent it to, um,
actually like not very many agents. I only think I only sent it to a few and one of whom I knew
personally. 5,000 words to very nicely say yikes. Which was good because it finally brought me down
to reality and realized that like, oh, I actually maybe should take this a little more seriously. So
I spent a few months on revisions and now armed with, you know, a little bit of perspective,
uh, we tried round two. This time I actually queried pretty widely. I got interest from about
30% of the agents I queried and then actually it happened rather quickly. I got an offer of
representation after about two, three months and then I had an agent. We did it. I hopped the
hardest turtle, right? So what now? Well, we revise it again substantially before we go on
submission. Submission round one, mostly big five and a couple of smaller publishers like Quirk
Books. Generally a round of submission will be between maybe 10 and 15 editors and, uh, wow,
that was a lot of rejection. Like I got rejected so hard I don't think I got like a detailed
rejection letter from anyone. And that whole rigmarole from start to final no thank was about
four months. So, uh, yeah. So what now? Well, we revise again. Let's try to figure out what was
wrong. Another round of submissions. This time it was, I think, a few more, maybe 15. And this time,
well, I got one or two rejections that were quite detailed. See? Progress. One or two felt it wasn't
commercial enough. The guy at HarperCollins thought I was whip smart. But most people just
didn't connect with the voice, which is, of course, industry to speak for. I think you're
a shitty writer. And here we are at the end of 2014. Two years of work and nothing to show for
it. What now? You can go downstream to smaller presses which, you know, might give you less money
up front but will still distribute as widely as any of the larger ones. Or you can go indie
or you can self-publish. I mean, that kind of makes sense. If you have a platform already,
self-publishing does mean you get to keep a much bigger cut of the money that comes in for you.
But there is a third option. We got us a trunk novel. The trunk novel. Everyone has one. They
don't. So, yeah, I could have self-published. Even now I get a lot of people asking me why I didn't
because, like, you know, hey, there's no shame in it. And also you'd make a lot more money with your
platform. And, well, okay. First of all, I don't know about that. I'm gonna, I'm gonna have to
disagree with you there, Bard. And secondly, I did not want to self-publish. Like, I'd self-publish
right here. Like, this is what I'm doing. That's what YouTube is. All I do is self-publish. But
ultimately the reason that I trunked it was because I felt that the reason it wasn't selling
wasn't because the market was necessarily hostile to that sort of thing, which it totally was, but
because it wasn't ready. And, by extension, I was not ready. I had not put in the work. I had not
done the hours. And there are many people who would call this flawed thinking. After all, publishing
is very fickle and they always play it safe. And most of the time, whenever you get a no from an
agent or publisher, it isn't because they don't like it. It's because they don't think they can
sell it. They don't think it will move copies. Yeah, after my book comes out, we will, we can talk about
the why. It was a hard sell, but the TLDR is it doesn't really fit with any kind of publishing
trends right now. That's it. That was actually simple. But at the end of the day, in my heart
of hearts, I knew trunk novel had major problems. Like, you know, there were definitely some
contrivances. Some of it was really half-assed. It read like a debut novel, which it was. So I put the
book away. The book has been trunked. Time to move on. Round two, 2015-2016. We have moved on completely.
I get an idea for a new novel, wholly unrelated to the first one, same genre, doesn't have aliens in
it. I very naively thought that this one would be more commercial, despite the fact that it was still
genre fiction, a thing that no one should ever write. I very naively gave it the working title
commercial as fuck, because I thought it would be. So I broke up with the first literary agent,
No Hard Feelings, because surely I will have no problem getting a literary agent that is more,
I don't know, suited to what I'm going for. I'm me. Huh. Looks like the lighting and setup has slightly
changed. It's not totally because I filmed this on a different day. I still have two copies of
John Scalzi's The Consuming Fire, though. This one says happy birthday. So I start writing commercial
as fuck over late 2016, early 2017, and then I start querying commercial as fuck around mid-2017,
and this one gets even less interesting the last time. Fucking really? This is supposed to be
commercial as fuck. So yeah, I got a bunch of partial requests and a bunch of full requests, but
ultimately no offers, asterisk. And a lot of the times it would get rejected for reasons that would
be like totally fixable, like, you know, location or something, and it would be like, oh well, I could
revise that. Okay. And while we are here, the truth is these days, if your book needs a lot of revision
or even not that much revision, agents probably aren't going to be interested in walking you
through it, although it does depend on the agent. Your mileage may vary. But I did find one agent
that was willing to work with it and was really interested in fixing it, you know, like the
characters, like the premise, but the ending is a little too bleak. And I'm like, look, it's 2017.
My heroes are dead and my enemies are in power. What do you want? But point taken. So she is willing
to talk representation if I am able to revise the thing in a way that she thinks can sell, but the
problem is I don't really know how I want to revise it. This is just where I'm at. So despite
the extensive feedback that this agent gives me, I sit on this thing for many months, not quite
knowing how to fix it. But it is at this point in early 2018, a full three years after our trunk
novel has been trunked, that I go ahead and dig that one out, maybe thinking that will inspire me,
and it is at this point that I remember what interested me so much in that story in the first
place. But it is also at this point that the problems that had been plaguing the thing basically
since its inception become wildly obvious to me. Why is it so expository in the first five chapters?
Why is the entire third act like that? Why did I not do a motivation better? And so trunk novel is
where my inspiration goes, not commercial as fuck, so I start working on that instead. And what was
supposed to be a fairly modest rewrite, with the intention of I guess, you know, getting the
creative juices flowing for the other one, ends up being like a complete overhaul. And by the end of
this rewrite, I have deleted about 60,000 words and written another 70,000. And so by the time
I'm done with this, and this would have been about a month after the Hobbit videos came out,
I was like, hey look, a thing. I guess I have two projects again, sort of. And as far as I can see,
trunk novel is the more polished of the two, so why don't we just tepidly see if there's any
interest there? So once again, I very tepidly send out like, I don't know, maybe 10 query letters and
noes across the board.
Okay, fine, this is clearly not meant to be. Fine. And the flavors of the no are pretty much
all variations on, I don't think I can sell that. But here's the thing, that revision actually
did do the thing it was intended to do, and it helped me figure out how I wanted to fix the bleak
ending of commercial as fuck. So you know what, working on trunk novel wasn't a total wash,
so I'm working on that, and then I get an email from this agent telling me that she is leaving
the agenting industry. Jesus Christ. All right, fine. Fine. I give up. I give up. The end. Oh,
wait, no, this is about like triumph or something. Never give up, except for I totally gave up.
And this is where my hashtag privilege comes in. So it was almost around this exact time that this
rando in Brooklyn emails me like, hey, I'm a literary agent. Do you have one? And this was
not the only thing that was going on in my life. Like, if you watch the talk I did for XOXO 2019,
which is on their YouTube channel, this was around that time. So, you know, my heroes are dead, my
enemies are in power. Not a great time. So he asked me if I have anything that I'd be willing
to share, and I'm like, okay, which one do you want? Do you want commercial as fuck or do you
want trunk novel? And he says whichever one is more done. So trunk novel it is. So basically,
in very short order, he does pinpoint the issue with why agents thought that they could not sell
this. And one of these days I might talk about the issue. And no, it wasn't about like problematic
content or gender or anything, but it was very small and ultimately very fixable. It was kind
of on the level of like, hey, this takes place in Santa Monica. What if it took place in San Diego
instead? We'll talk about it one day. So this dude, his name is Christopher Hermelin, and he
is part of a boutique agency in Brooklyn. He signs me up, we do a round or two of revisions,
and then we go on submission the first week of January. That was on a Monday. I get my first
phone call from an editor on a Friday, and then after talking to a few more, ultimately it's sold
in less than two weeks. Yep. Okay, so ultimately we come again full circle with that question of
why is my thing not selling? What is wrong with my manuscript? Is it my manuscript that's the
problem or the market? And in my case, it's a little difficult to answer since I ultimately did
sell to a commercial imprint, and the book itself doesn't really fall in line with any publishing
trends right now. So it does kind of remain to be seen just how much, if at all, Saint Martin's
gamble will pay off. Because that is kind of the reason that agents are so bearish, and they want
things that are comparable to things that have already sold well. This, for the record, was mine.
Thank you. Thanks for debuting at number one. Readers are creatures of habit. They want things
that are like the thing that they've already read. So if I'm to come to a publisher with this book
and they're like, okay, what is it about? And I'm like, I don't know, it's Independence Day meets
the big short. Mary Doria Russell's Invader Zim. I guess it's kind of fair for them to be like,
I don't really care if it's any good or not, I don't know if I can sell that. The point here being
is that it is honestly really difficult to tell where the line in the sand is. Your work is not
good enough, and the publisher slash agent doesn't think there is a market for it. So in conclusion,
something, something, follow your dreams. I think it would have been just as easy for me to be like,
yeah, I wrote a thing and it's out now, and then not, you know, cop to the 10 years of,
I guess failure is a strong word, struggle. And then people will be like, wow, I guess you just
magically did it on the first try when in reality, no. Because it doesn't do anyone any favors to act
like, even in a position like mine where I have a relatively large online platform, I didn't have to
put in the work and go through a lot of rejection. But here is what I have learned from the thing.
Learning to write, learning to be a novelist, and the publishing industry in general is
incredibly, incredibly slow going. So you have to be incredibly patient. And looking back,
the best choice I made in the whole thing was choosing to trunk that novel in 2014.
So the fact that I was able to get in another five years of writing experience actually helped
the thing get to a level where it could sell to a major publisher and hopefully will be, you know,
not hated by a plurality of you. So in some ways, I think fiction is more difficult to publish than
nonfiction because it's harder to really gauge demand for. But that is not to say that nonfiction
is easier. It's just different. But a lot of people's success really is owed to luck and timing.
These people that you hear of that get these like debut novels with six-figure advances and, you
know, they tend to be YA, um, they hit at the right point in the right genre, but they also
tend to be outliers. For instance, if you were querying a YA dystopia in 2009, you're probably
going to get different results from querying the same book in 2019. A few years ago, author
Jim C. Heinz did a survey of traditionally published authors to see how long it actually
took them to get published, and the average length of time was, drumroll, 11 years. So what
does that mean for this channel? Is this going to turn into this shameless self-promotion channel?
Well, no, not yet. I mean, six months it will. But I do imagine that this has shed some light on
why this channel hasn't been as prolific as it has been in years past. And one more thing with
regard to pre-orders, and this applies to pretty much all traditionally published authors, is if
you want to support an author and you plan on buying the book anyway, pre-orders are a great way
to do that because it helps the publisher decide where they are going to end up, you know,
spending their resources. Who gets the marketing? Who gets to go on a book tour?
Pre-orders are basically their barometer to, you know, who gives a shit. So if you want to pre-order
American Three-Body Problem for Girls, the link is in the description. It is available in hardcover
and Kindle right now. I guess the paperback will be like, I don't know, six months or a year after that.
And yeah, this won't be the last video of this kind. I will probably be doing a lot more process
slash publishing industry type stuff in the months and years to come. Although yes, don't worry,
we will still be doing traditional video essay type stuff too. So yeah, so yeah, I know everybody
can't wait for this YouTuber book. This should be, this should be an interesting journey that we can
all go on together. Hope this was some help, and if it wasn't, well, hope at least it was
entertaining to watch. This is gonna be a long year. Happy end of the decade, everybody!
