My thanks to all those who suggested, or defiantly challenged me to debunk some supposedly higher
hanging fruit that you thought would be hard to debunk. I'll tackle those over the next
couple of videos. But I thought I'd start with this one because several people suggested
it and because the story is quite recent. The link led me to this blog.
Now this isn't something I'd normally cover because it hasn't got much science content,
but it is about scientists weaponising a virus and it's been widely reported and
believed so I'm happy to accept.
Debunking anything is a simple matter of finding the source in a series of steps. In this case
the first step is easy because the source is right there at the bottom of the page.
It links to this story by Rhea Matthews on news.com.au saying a leaked Chinese document
reveals a sinister plan to unleash coronavirus. And it quotes the Executive Director of the
Australian Strategic Policy Institute Peter Jennings as saying this is as close to a smoking
gun as we've got. It also says Robert Potter, a cyber security specialist who analyses leaked
Chinese government documents, was asked by the Australian to verify the paper. He says
the document definitely isn't fake.
News.com.au says it got all its information from the Australian newspaper because as luck
would have it both media outlets are run by News Corp, owned by my old boss Rupert Murdoch.
So both stories should have reported the same facts. You would have thought. But it turns
out they don't. I read the Australian story online so this is just a screenshot. The article
leads with this. The document, written by People's Liberation Army scientists and senior
Chinese public health officials in 2015, was obtained by the US State Department as it
conducted an investigation into the origins of Covid-19, the Weekend Australian has confirmed.
That certainly sounds secret, although the Australian doesn't actually say that the document
was secret. Then it changes from a document to a paper. The paper describes SARS coronaviruses
as heralding a new era of genetic weapons and says they can be artificially manipulated
into an emerging human disease virus, then weaponised and unleashed in a way never seen
before. The revelation? But hang on, is this really a revelation? After all, it's been
known for years that viruses can be engineered and weaponised. That's been the subject of
discussion by military analysts and intelligence organisations for decades, not just in China.
There's nothing in the Australian article to support news.com.au's assertion of an actual
plan to unleash coronaviruses. So where did the Australian get this from?
The Revelation features in an upcoming investigative book on the origins of Covid-19, titled What
Really Happened in Wuhan, to be published by HarperCollins. And as luck would have it,
the author of that book, Shari Markson, also works for News Corp. She not only writes for
the Australian, she's a commentator on News Corp's Sky News, where she first revealed
the contents of this leaked document.
New details from a document produced by Chinese military scientists, where they discuss weaponising
SARS coronaviruses five years before the pandemic hit. The book was written by…
Hang on, a book? This was a book? I thought this was… yeah, and not just any old Chinese
document, this was supposed to be a leaked Chinese document obtained by the US State
Department. But sure enough, I put a translated title into Wordsearch, and there it was. Not
only is this leaked document in fact a book, it was for sale on Amazon. Yeah, you could
once buy this book online, assuming you could afford it. The reason you can't do so now
is that it was published six years ago, so hardly a revelation.
Even if it's a six year old book, that doesn't change the fact that it reveals China's
sinister plan to unleash coronaviruses on the world. But this is the first thing that
struck me as odd. Why would the Chinese government hatch a sinister plan to bioengineer a deadly
virus in order to unleash it on the world, and then reveal the plan in a book and sell
it on Amazon? Sorry, just leaving you with that thought for a second.
Secondly, since the book would have been purchased and avidly read by intelligence agencies around
the world six years ago when it was published, how come they didn't see this as a sinister
plan to unleash a deadly virus on the world, or warn against it, or publicly condemn it?
No one writing about this has actually read the book, they're all relying on the information
about the contents from just one source, a commentator on Sky News. But in fact, she
doesn't say the book reveals a sinister plan to unleash coronaviruses at all. She
only says that the scientists discussed weaponising SARS coronaviruses.
It describes SARS coronaviruses as heralding, and I quote, a new era of genetic weapons.
It says they can be artificially manipulated into an emerging human disease virus, weaponised
and unleashed in a way never seen before.
And here are two more quotes that are interesting.
Biological weapons attacks could cause catastrophic harm. They could inflict widespread injury
and result in massive casualties and economic disruption. China possesses formidable capabilities.
That's pretty damning evidence.
In fact, this quote doesn't actually come from the book. It's from a publicly obtainable
document published by the White House in 2004. All I've done is substitute the word China
instead of the United States. If we see the quotes in context, you can see they have a
completely different meaning. The reason they have these discussions and do a lot of research
in this area is because the possibility of a viral attack is of great concern.
The significance of this paper is that it offers a rare insight into how senior scientists
at one of the PLA's most prominent military universities, where high levels of defence
research are conducted, were thinking about biological research.
But I thought the most significant thing in this book was supposed to be that it reveals
a sinister Chinese plan to unleash coronaviruses on the world. To uncover this sinister plan,
we need to see exactly what the discussion entailed. I can't get hold of a copy of the
book, of course, it's out of print, so I first checked a description of the book by the two
authors on the Amazon website. And yes indeed, they are discussing the weaponisation of SARS
virus, because they see it as a threat. Their conclusion is that another country may have
created the SARS virus and unleashed it on China.
I also found an extensive review of the book by a reader, written long before the Sky News
story went to air, and he relays the same conclusion. This book suspects that the SARS
virus was actually produced by a foreign laboratory. Further into her programme, Markson also says
that's the book's conclusion.
They claim, and it's a conspiracy theory, that the first SARS from 2003 was a man-made
bioweapon deliberately unleashed on China by terrorists. Of course, scientific consensus
holds that SARS was of natural origin and that it crossed the xenographic barrier from
palm civets to humans, likely through the sale of wild animals in wet markets. So this
is a very odd conspiracy theory for a senior Chinese military scientist to be pushing about
the SARS pandemic of 2003. And it's very similar to China now claiming that the COVID-19 pandemic
was brought into Wuhan in frozen food or by the American military.
Yes, I feel your pain, Shari. The book is nothing more than a conspiracy theory that
foreign enemies, and Taiwan was specifically mentioned, engineered SARS and launched it
against China. Now it's clear why the People's Liberation Army wanted this book to be published
and sold around the world. If you believe what this book says, then you've got an
awful lot of faith in what the Chinese government says and in unsubstantiated conspiracy theories
coming out of Beijing. So despite the rather dramatic innuendo in Marksman's opening,
she never said China had a plan to unleash coronaviruses. That part was invented later
along the information trail, which now looks like this. A publicly available book that
looks at the possibility that a foreign country had weaponised SARS and launched it against
China becomes a book discussing weaponising SARS, and that becomes a document obtained
by the US State Department discussing weaponising SARS, and that becomes a leaked document revealing
a sinister plan to unleash coronaviruses. So where in this chain of shame did the information
get changed? Well, Shari Marksman's account of the book is largely accurate and supported
by the authors themselves and by a reader. But she used disembodied quotes to make it
sound as though this had something to do with the current SARS-CoV-2 pandemic without offering
a shred of evidence that it did. The Australian hyped that further and made it sound as though
this was some kind of a secret document. But the real break comes when news.com.au gets
hold of the story and replaces the word book with leaked document and substitutes a discussion
about the weaponisation of SARS with a sinister Chinese plan to weaponise SARS, and that gets
copied and passed round the world. Of course, we had broken the big breaking news about
how the Chinese military had of course planned a biological warfare using the Covid-19 virus.
As you can see on your screens, the article written by an Australian publication, which
says that the Chinese scientists and the People Liberation Army in fact put their heads
together and came out with a document and wrote about how they were going to use the
SARS virus against the world. This kind of misinformation is exactly the
kind of thing you see in China all the time. News outlets that are ordered to follow a
particular line and facts that are ignored or invented in order to push that line. Do
we really want to see Western media descend to the same level of manipulation and propaganda?
Too late, but I think we can do better.
