Well, the winner for the last poll was Jack the Ripper, which, of course, is an interesting choice.
So, I hope you like ominous shots of feet in the dark and lots of women getting brutalized.
And, you know, I don't mean that in the fun way. Of course, it's always kind of a sexualized brutalization.
Most of it's from the 70s and 80s and looks like garbage, but, you know, fewer discretion advised.
The Ripper case was a huge press sensation at the time,
especially given early speculation that he was an educated surgeon,
owing to his apparent knowledge of human anatomy,
which gave rise to the image of the upper-class fellow stalking the streets in a top hat and a cloak.
Why did this guy stick in the public imagination in the way that other serial killers,
even more recent and infamous ones, haven't?
It's not like he was the only serial killer in Victorian England.
But the biggie is the fact that this mega sensation, A, never got caught,
and B, his victims were all sex workers, which doubled the scandalous.
And so it entered the public consciousness as, like, the perfect scandalous thing.
You know, we've got women being brutalized, an unsolved mystery, a presumed upper-class villain,
and we don't even know who he is. It could be anybody.
So here's what we have to work off of.
The five victims generally agreed to have been the work of a single killer known as Jack the Ripper were
Marianne Nichols, Annie Chapman, Elizabeth Stride, Catherine Eddowes, and Mary Jane Kelly.
These murders occurred between August and November of 1888,
all within a few streets of each other, and are collectively called the Canonical Five.
There were actually six more murders between then and 1891, all women,
and may or may not be connected to the Ripper or might be copycats.
There's actually a BBC show about the direct aftermath,
but I'm not really going to get into that one because it's about the direct aftermath.
In a lot of these movies, they also include victim Elizabeth Smith as canonical.
And then there are six murders instead of five because Freemasons.
Chief Inspector Fred Epperlein and his contemporaries had a lot of suspects at the time.
None of these went anywhere.
In later years, we'd see suspects like Lewis Carroll, Winston Churchill's father, Lord Randolph Churchill.
He was a Freemason, see?
And Sir Arthur Conan Doyle because doctor.
The Freemasons come up a lot.
Apparently, they're the precursors to the modern Illuminati,
except for the part where they actually exist.
Because, say it with me, the Illuminati isn't real.
Prince Albert Victor became a favorite theory after the 1970s
when British physician Thomas Stonewell published an article implying that he'd been driven mad by syphilis.
The idea that the Freemasons were involved with the royal family also became really popular in the 70s,
and we'll get to that.
Although, I swear to God, we could have had this thing happen like a hundred years later,
and there'd be all these like YouTube channels about how the Ripper killings were like a false flag operation for,
I don't know, like, Brexit or, you know, they're trying to take away our guns, our England guns, somehow.
Anyway, I don't know.
One of the first fictive incarnations came in the form of Marie Belloc-Loundez's serial book,
The Lodger, published in serialized form between 1911 and 1913.
This wasn't a straight Jack the Ripper story per se.
It had only been about 20 years at the time.
Hashtag too soon.
But the killer herein, called the Avenger, was clearly based on the Ripper.
This became the basis for one of Alfred Hitchcock's first films, also called The Lodger.
The eponymous Lodger is a house guest staying with a London couple
who eventually come to suspect him of doing the killings.
In the original, he leaves and it's left ambivalent as to whether he was the killer or not.
In Hitchcock's version, turns out the Lodger is not the killer,
but was acting weird because he's a vigilante and he's actually trying to catch the killer.
This story would go on to get remade four more times.
By the 1950s, the Ripper was becoming a popular horror element.
A 1959 Hollywood movie simply titled Jack the Ripper is a standard whodunit
based on Leonard Matters' theory that he was an avenging doctor.
Not just any doctor, avenging.
But where Matters' theory had it that the Ripper was mad about his son catching a venereal disease,
this being rooted in the fact that Catherine Edo's nose had been cut off,
which implies not only that she had syphilis, but that the Ripper wanted to postmortemly shame her for it.
Because your nose rotting off is the syphilis thing.
Was. We have penicillin now.
In this movie, he's mad because his son committed suicide after learning his lover was a prostitute.
By the 1960s, the Ripper was established in media as less as a man
and more of a universal force of evil who could be adapted to suit any villainous niche.
Here he is in a Western.
Cimarron's Strip was a Western that only lasted one season,
and in one episode, interestingly written by Harlan Ellison,
women start getting murdered.
And, of course, they blame the native guy.
Until a British dude comes along like, hey, this seems familiar.
He calls himself Jack the Ripper.
So maybe the Ripper skipped London and has been terrorizing his way across the American West.
Things were getting too warm for him in London, so he came to America.
I followed him.
You know who Jack the Ripper is.
Who is he?
I'm afraid I must keep that from you a little longer, Watson.
Another trend that popped up around this time was Ripper vs. Sherlock Holmes.
The first movie version was 1965's A Study in Terror,
which starred John Neville as Sherlock and Donald Houston as Dr. Watson.
This one plays again off a presumed aristocratic villain.
Any trade must be dishonorable.
A trade, sir?
Oh, you do not throw shade at Watson like that.
Of course, Sherlock figures out who did it,
but I find it more remarkable that he appears to be invulnerable.
But how on earth did you get out of it, Holmes?
You know my methods, Watson. I'm well known to be indestructible.
What, are they really just gonna wave that off?
Does Sherlock have Luke Cage powers?
There have been video games based on Sherlock vs. Ripper.
They even go head-to-head on our old friend...
Celebrity Deathmatch.
Super sleuth Sherlock Holmes takes on the poster boy for Prostitute Killers,
Jack the Ripper!
Boy, I love me some Celebrity Deathmatch.
A 1979 film called Murder by Decree once again pitted Sherlock,
this time played by Christopher Plummer, against the Ripper.
But this one's a double crossover.
See, in 1978, this guy named Stephen Knight published a book called Jack the Ripper,
The Final Solution, which pushed the so-called Royal Conspiracy.
Though the culprit isn't poor syphilitic Prince Albert Victor.
While this theory is one of the more, you know, out there,
it's also one of the most popular.
You know, presumably because it included everybody.
The Freemasons, the Royals, a prostitute conspiracy, and a doctor.
Proof that a woman was cynically taken in marriage.
I have proof of the husband's name, that a child was born.
I have proof that the woman was committed to an asylum by order of that same spivey.
That, incidentally, is who did it in this theory.
Sir William Gull, the Royal Physician.
See, there's a legitimate prince baby no one's supposed to know about,
and also Albert has syphilis.
And Sir Gull wants to hide this shame, so there's our motive, I guess.
Would these injuries imply medical knowledge?
This one, a two-part made-for-TV movie simply called Jack the Ripper,
stars Michael Caine as an alcoholic Inspector Eberlein
and coincided with the hundred-year anniversary of the murders.
This one is the most extensive adaptation based on the Night Conspiracy.
Our story is based on extensive research.
Including the official files by special permission of the Home Office.
Wow. Okay.
And like the Night Conspiracy, the killer is ultimately the Queen's personal surgeon, Sir William Gull.
Who also does Darth Vader breath?
Darth Vader breath.
Our story is based on extensive research.
The most well-known derived from the Stephen Knight theory is 2001's From Hell,
based on the comic book of the same name.
This time Eberlein, played by Johnny Depp, is an opium addict instead of an alcoholic,
and apparently has psychic powers.
A repetitive code saturated with blood.
You know, they used to burn men like you alive.
Yeah, this doesn't go anywhere.
And Heather Graham plays Mary Kelly, the last of Jack's victims.
Honestly, the thing I find the most remarkable about this version
is that Jack's victims are actual characters and not objects that exist solely to scream and then die.
In fact, Mary Kelly actually lives.
Some hapless other lady is the one who gets killed and then they just kind of hide it.
Also, John Merrick is here for some reason.
Yeah, that also goes nowhere.
Anyway, as with the 88 version, the culprit turns out to be the Queen's surgeon, Sir William Gull.
Something something masons, something something conspiracy,
and who's Gull but Bilbo the Ripper.
Nothing says menace like weird CGI evil eye black.
These symbols, the mitre, the pentacle star.
So Mary Kelly lives the rest of her life out in secret with the secret royal conspiracy baby,
and Eberlein dies in this version.
Good night, sweet prince.
I mean, the idea that these women all knew each other,
and they also knew some horrible secret,
and someone killed them trying to protect the secret,
you know, it makes sense from a narrative standpoint.
It's just bullshit history.
One day, men will look back
and say I gave birth to the 20th century.
So for our next section, I'm going to make this the start of a new segment,
which I'm going to call, hey, 1970s, are you okay?
No, really, are you okay?
And this will be the content warning-iest part.
So again, viewer discretion advised.
Ah, the 70s, when women being sexually brutalized on film was the new hotness.
So Jack the Ripper movies were all the rage.
In Dr. Jekyll and Sister Hyde, Dr. Jekyll is played by a sort of proto-Crispin Glover
in a Jack the Ripper themed hammer horror.
Female hormones are the key to the elixir of life, hypothesizes Jekyll.
Hormones. Female hormones.
And that's why we've got all these 200-year-old women running around.
So in this version, Dr. Jekyll's syrup turns him into a woman.
Beautiful, but evil.
It is I who exists, Dr. Jekyll, not you.
And in order to maintain the change, he needs a constant supply of female hormones from cadavers.
Female cadavers.
And, you know, he doesn't like killing, but Mrs. Hyde relishes killing.
So basically, the Whitechapel murders were done by an evil trans woman.
Yeah.
In Hands of the Ripper, another hammer horror, hey, Jack had a daughter.
And this daughter grows up to be a murderess after witnessing her father kill her mother as a child.
Even when the killer is a woman, the women in these movies just can't catch a break.
So Jack's daughter goes into like this Pavlovian feud triggered by shinies and kisses.
And her hands turn into Ripper hands, and she murders her mother figures.
All of them.
Poor child.
Stop putting her in the same room as sympathetic mother figures.
She somehow even manages to kill a prostitute.
Like, she just wanders down the road and finds one.
Yeah.
Did you say anything, dear?
She said with her totally real and not-at-all-dubbed voice.
This one is an Italian-Spanish co-production,
and rather than being a period piece, is a modern retelling.
Okay.
And this is what passed for erotic in the 70s.
Yep.
Man, the erotic passion.
Nothing hotter than a bored woman undressing.
Ah!
Okay.
I hope all the murders in this movie end with that bass riff.
Also because a serial killer targeting sex workers wasn't scandalous enough,
apparently this one's also a cannibal.
But surely Jack the Ripper's dead, isn't he?
Undoubtedly, or extremely old.
Ah, the greatest detective Mayans of their day.
This one, also simply titled Jack the Ripper, is in German and dubbed into English.
It takes a Fifty Shades of Grey approach,
with the I'm-mad-at-my-prostitute-mother-and-that's-why-I-rape-and-kill prostitutes.
I am exactly like your mother.
A whore.
Most of the movie's about Jack himself and his motivations and his tragic backstory
and how he's actually a nice doctor some of the time.
Boy, do I not care.
Of course, being German, this movie can and wants to get away with a lot more
than we see in, like, the Hammer horrors or the Italian-Spanish co-productions.
Oh, yeah, this one also adds a lot of rape.
A lot of rape. I'm not gonna show it.
Oh, but we didn't forget about you, 80s.
If you want some 80s crack, we got your 80s crack.
So, it's the 100th anniversary of the Whitechapel murders,
and some copycat is killing ladies.
And who's our prime suspect?
It's Baby James Spader.
They think he's the Ripper because he's a med student.
And, as we all know, Jack the Ripper was a doctor.
But, uh-oh, how could it be him when he gets murdered?
Well, fortunately, he has, like, a twin brother who is also played by James Spader.
And so now twin Baby James Spader has to clear his brother's name,
save the girl, and find the real killer.
James Spader!
Getting even more squirrely, then there's the subgenre of Jack the Supernatural Being.
Now, here we have another soul in torment.
Jack the Ripper.
When a wax museum features an exhibit about famous serial killers closes,
one curator begs to take the wax figures home.
And he sympathizes a little too much with the wax figures.
And we can only guess what devils pushed them to their bloody fate.
So, he takes them home and keeps them all nice and air-conditioned.
But his wife doesn't like it, and then she gets stabbed by the Jack the Ripper wax figure
when she tries to turn off the A.C.
Who would believe me if I told them that you were killed by Jack the Ripper?
The war must have been pretty bad, huh?
Yeah, weird that it's shaped like a coffin.
The twist is a bit ripped from Psycho.
The guy puts his action off on another entity, but...
No, Martin Sinistro, it was you.
You murdered your wife.
It was him the whole time.
Only this time it's from the point of view of Norman Bates.
It was you.
A more recent one comes from Grimm, which is a supernatural-based procedural,
kind of like Sleepy Hollow.
At the end of the fourth season, one of the protagonists is possessed by an entity
that turns out to be Jack the Ripper.
And yeah, he kills prostitutes, which are...
Just what I had in mind.
Wow.
Okay, I guess some people are into that.
They get him out by shooting the captain with rubber bullets
and tricking the entity into thinking its host was dead.
Squirrely-er still,
Jack the literal alien.
In a 1997 episode of The Outer Limits,
Jack was a crusader for good, see?
These prostitutes are actually inhabited by an evil alien entity.
Who are you?
I'm a nightmare, Jack.
You're not even of this world.
Cary Elwes plays Dr. Jack York,
who, after figuring out there's an evil entity about,
takes it upon himself to kill it.
And sometimes that means killing its hosts.
Also, hi David Warner.
Don't worry.
You'll hardly feel a thing.
But he fails and basically gets framed for the murders
by a spiteful, bored alien.
Nickname for mass murderer of women.
Other Earth synonym,
Jack the Ripper.
He pops up again in an episode of the original Star Trek.
So apparently Scotty was involved in an explosion
caused by a woman in a previous episode,
resulting in his...
Total resentment toward women.
You know, I'm glad at least
someone is bringing that up.
So basically, Jack the Ripper was a literal alien.
It feeds on horror and fear.
And I suspect preys on women
because women are more easily
and more deeply terrified.
Wow. That's like some biotruth
or misogynist YouTuber logic there, Spock.
Hatred of all that lives.
Hatred of women.
Oh, and then Jack the Ripper
takes over the Enterprise, but
since fear is the issue, they basically
save the day with Valium.
In a 1995 episode of Babylon 5,
Jack isn't so much an alien as
was abducted by aliens
and then made their inquisitor.
So basically, the Vorgons unfreeze him
whenever they need someone inquisited.
And he's good at this torture thing, but
ultimately he just kind of really wants to teach a lesson.
Aww, did we just get the seal of approval
from Jack the Ripper?
Anyway, this is the only one where
Jack apparently learned his lesson.
Not sure how I feel about that.
Well, piggybacking off of that,
we have Jack the Time Traveler.
In Time After Time, a less schlocky
addition to the 70s canon,
Jack is played by, well hello again, David Warner,
who escapes to the modern, well
1979 modern, day in a time machine.
And he is pursued by H.G. Wells,
played by Malcolm McDowell.
And see, Jack likes it here in the 70s
because it's so much more violent
than 1888.
Look at these looney tunes beating each other.
Look at how violent.
Ah, the time travel variation
on Modern Man is the real monster.
Wow.
That's deep, man.
Fantasy Island is like this magical
realism show where people come to
Mr. Rourke's Island to live out their fantasies.
And Mr. Rourke is kind of like a
philanthropic, less creepy Hugh Hefner
with magic powers and also wants to teach you a lesson.
And usually the fantasies are kind of goofy.
Like, the other one in this episode is just
a guy who wants to be sexy and learns a lesson
about respecting women or something.
But this lady's fantasy is solving the Whitechapel murders.
And Rourke's like, I don't know,
seems kind of dangerous.
You sure you don't want, like, a makeover or something?
For your own sake, I must
urge you to reconsider.
No, at great personal risk, she figures out who Jack the Ripper is.
And yeah, he's a doctor.
But oh no, he's found her time portal.
It shows that Albert Fell
was abandoned by his mother.
She became a prostitute.
There it is. Oh, but don't worry,
Ricardo Montalban to the rescue.
I guess Montalban's steely gaze
was just too much for him.
You just killed Jack the Ripper.
No, Catherine.
I just became him.
A slight inversion of the regular time traveler,
this time the time cop goes back in time
to catch, well, not Jack the Ripper,
but a guy who killed and replaced
Jack the Ripper.
He also killed people. So you have to go back in time
and make sure the replacement Jack doesn't screw up history
too much without altering history.
And save Mary Kelly.
Hey, you could always pull a From Hell and have a Mary Kelly
body double. Nope.
Sorry, Mary Kelly. Then we have the
oddly specific yet strangely
common trope of Jack being
transported through time through some magical
artifact. A 1985
made-for-TV movie starring David
Hasselhoff has him originally dying on
London Bridge, only to be transported to
modern day, well,
1985 modern day Arizona.
Anyway, London Bridge was apparently
in real life relocated to Arizona.
I assumed this was like a weird
plot contrivance made because Arizona is
cheaper to shoot your TV movie in than LA,
but nope. This is a thing that really
happened. An oil baron bought the
bridge, they deconstructed it brick by brick,
and reconstructed it in Lake Havasu
City, Arizona.
Anyway, they missed the final stone until 1985
and it just happened to contain
the spirit of Jack the Ripper, wouldn't
you know. In 1985's The
Ripper, Jack's spirit resides in an old
antique ring, and his spirit possesses
whomsoever is wearing it. In this case,
a college professor who happens to be teaching a
film studies course on famous crimes as
depicted on film. And finally, during
season 3 of Sleepy Hollow, the Ripper's spirit
is carried through...
We're not searching for a monster.
We're searching for a weapon.
So there was a guy called
simply The Ripper running around in Ichabod's
time, which was about 100 years
before the historical Jack the Ripper.
He has gone by many names over the centuries.
You might know him
as Jack the Ripper.
Well, turns out The Ripper is like
an evil knife, and whoever
wields the knife, the knife builds on their
worst attributes. And the knife is also like
a vampire knife, absorbing the blood of
its victims. The method of defeat here
is that it stabs Ichabod, who
infects himself with malaria.
Which is a weird resolution, because we know
OG Ripper stabbed some late-stage syphilitics,
so this is an interesting, uh,
way to go about it, all things considered.
Eh, maybe that's what brought the original knife down too.
So, there we have it.
A lot of piggybacking off of common conspiracy
theories, but mostly
just weird shit.
I'll kill
all of you. And it
is kind of human nature to want to
ascribe some meaning to something so
horrible, but really,
it's just grasping at straws
for something that is ultimately meaningless.
You know, there is no
grand conspiracy, the Freemasons
are just, you know, some dude's
social club, and the Illuminati
isn't real.
Thank you for watching, and
please remember to like and subscribe,
because as you know, all YouTubers are contractually
obligated to remind you to do this thing
every single video.
Thank you very much to my patrons
who helped make this entire series and
video making thing possible.
I've been getting a lot of requests
to do more video essay type things,
so I'll work on that, but remember, those
take a lot longer than
your straight up loose cannon.
And as for the people who keep asking me about the rent video,
I'm working on it.
Patience.
