So YouTube's all in an uproar, because apparently there are too many genders.
There are simply too many notes, Hamletzart.
You see, when we were kids, boys played with tiny skateboards and girls played with urine.
Potty feels like magic and it flushes out loud.
The cosmic order was in balance, but now there's demigweers and trigenders and everyone wants
to kill themselves.
But you know what?
Maybe hold off on the bleach for a second, Barry Hamlet.
I say we give this thing a shot.
But if we're gonna do that, we're gonna need to get into the spirit of the thing.
So I think we're at a point where most civilized people accept homosexuality, and we seem to
even be making progress in the transgender issue, but non-binary genders are where the
line has been drawn.
Now, I don't identify as non-binary myself.
In fact, I identify as a mane, which is how Blue Man Muddy Waters pronounces the word
man.
Say it again.
If you mispronounce it, I will be triggered.
The point is I can't claim to speak for people who are non-binary, but what I can do is look
at arguments against non-binary identities and see if they have any merit.
I say arguments against because I don't think non-binary people need to provide any arguments
in support of their own existence, because, unlike most of you, I am a real American,
which means that I believe in a little thing you may have forgotten about called freedom.
Argument one.
It's new and different and I don't like it.
The vast majority of people I see objecting to non-binary identities are people who are
basically just repulsed by something that's new and different and ridiculous to them.
I identify as an attack helicopter.
It's funny because you could never use a helicopter in combat.
It should, but doesn't go without saying, that finding something weird and distasteful
does not in itself amount to an argument against it.
I find it especially hard to sympathize with this view, since I have a personality type
that just kind of goes along with things, almost to a pathological extent.
Like, normal human beings are repulsed by things like incest and cannibalism, but I
kind of just don't have any emotions at all about those things.
And if someone tells me they alternate between three different gender identities, my initial
response is to say, really, that's interesting, tell me more.
You know, I'm not repulsed, if anything, I'm attracted.
If you think I'm comparing non-binary identities to cannibalism, here's the address to complain
to.
Argument two.
This is just made up because there's no science to support it.
It's very interesting for me as a transsexual to see so many people running around claiming
all these crazy gender identities, when in reality, being transgender is an actual medical
diagnosis.
It means you've been diagnosed with gender dysphoria, which is basically an extreme discontent
with one's own gender.
So Blair's argument is that being transsexual is a medical diagnosis, whereas being non-binary
isn't, and therefore the former is a real phenomenon, whereas the latter is just make-believe.
But for one thing, this is just an appeal to the authority of current medical practice.
Five seconds ago, homosexuality was an actual medical diagnosis.
Monarchs make shit up as they go just as much as anyone, and they invent new words
to describe new conditions all the time.
For another thing, non-binary gender isn't primarily a medical issue in the first place.
Keep in mind that there's multiple dimensions to gender.
There's biological sex, male, female, intersex.
There's social roles, including things like mannerisms, style, dress, what kinds of work
and relationships are open to you.
And then there's identity, which is your inner sense of what gender you are.
And gender identity is what's in question here, so I really don't see why we need a
biological basis for validation.
You know, there's probably no gay gene, but there's definitely gay people, and we
didn't need brain scans to figure that out.
For another thing, there isn't very much in the way of scientific research on non-binary
genders yet.
We can't have scientific terms for things until scientists decide to study them.
Argument three.
I don't feel like a gender, therefore no one else does either.
So to me, gender identity is kind of a confusing topic, since I personally don't have any
strong feelings of identifying with a gender at all.
I look inside myself and I ask, do I feel like a man or a woman?
And the answer is that I feel like shit.
I mean, it's just hollow in here.
To me, gender is all costumes, it's all charade, I choose to perform masculinity because that's
what I've been conditioned to do and it's just easiest.
But I feel irony toward gender roles and a kind of distance from my body.
If I woke up tomorrow with tits and a vagina, I think I could probably roll with it.
You know, I get to wear better clothes.
But the only time I really feel like a woman is when I listen to Lionel Richie.
Yes, you once, you twice, three times a lady.
Oh yeah.
That's the stuff.
And the only times I feel like a man are when I listen to Muddy Waters and when I'm having
sex with a woman, which feels very natural.
You could try it sometime.
You know, God smiles down, the angels trumpets sound, the maiden is laid bare, the intrepid
knight bounces.
Oh, for fuck's sake!
What do you want?
Oh, Jesus.
Dark Mother, what is it now?
You dare make a video about feminism and not mention me!
This video isn't even about feminism!
It definitely isn't about video games.
But every video must be about me, because I'm the most important woman in the world!
No.
You know what?
Fuck that.
I'm not doing this anymore.
SILENCE!
Alright.
Suck your goddamn c**t.
Man, I'm tired of this shit.
Argument 4.
I refuse to call people by non-binary pronouns because it's not grammatical English.
What do you people think language is, anyway?
You do realize it's just a bunch of fucking sounds coming out of your mouth.
According to Wittgenstein, yeah I'm pulling this card, the meaning of words is determined
merely by the way they're used.
So if we start using words in a new way, the new use determines the new meaning, and grammars
can be created or destroyed to suit our purposes.
You know, language is a human tool, not a dictate of the gods.
Wittgenstein also compared language to an ancient city, since language is always built
around the ruins of its own past.
This is also why I think the non-binary pronoun they is more likely to catch on than new inventions
like Z in here, because it's just a more natural way for the language to evolve.
But you know, Wittgenstein was also another one of these boring, unfunny, self-loathing
gay Jews, so, you know, what is with these guys?
Argument 5.
Non-binary people are just special snowflake trans-crenders.
Well, there's no doubt that non-binary genders are having a bit of a moment right now.
And you could ask, will all of these neologisms stick, you know, words like cloudgender and
greygender and astrogender, and the answer is that probably no, most of them won't.
But some of them probably will.
And while this gender inventiveness has probably gotten a little bit out of hand, I'm sure
it's always been the case that there are people who don't really fit into either gender,
and it's probably always going to be the case, and surely a society that makes room
for those people is more humane than one that doesn't.
And while the current wave of gender inventors will probably make some mistakes along the
way, I for one admire their experimentation.
For one thing, they've paved the way for the rest of us normies to become a little
more fluid ourselves.
And why not?
It's fun.
So if we allow non-binary genders, then soon people's genders will be pineapple and mayonnaise.
Good.
Let's have pineapple and mayonnaise genders.
And this is where I'd like to see the radical feminists get on board.
I mean, patriarchy cannot possibly exist in a society where a significant number of people
are mayonnaise gender.
How am I supposed to explain to my child?
Kill your shitty child.
Then you won't have to explain anything.
Seriously, though, I think kids should be confused by gender, because it doesn't make
any goddamn sense.
In traditional agrarian societies, it made sense to divide people up by sex and assign
them different roles.
All there was to do in life was farm and reproduce, so men used their school biceps to plow the
mule and women bled on the birthing bed, and it was a pretty good system.
But in a capitalist, individualistic society, it doesn't really make sense to assign people
rigid roles based on what reproductive organs they have.
We know from history and anthropology that gender is pretty variable.
So I say, let's reinvent it to suit our purposes.
We should be celebrating, not mocking, the gender deviance of our own time.
After all, they're paving the way for the future, when our great-grandchildren will
plug their brains directly into the simulation to avoid the climate change-induced nightmare
that is what's left of the physical and biological realm.
There will be no more men and women in this world, only quad-gender wolfkin shamans endlessly
pollulating over the sunny plains of Azeroth.
And that, frankly, is a paradise I'm looking forward to.
If you liked this video, consider sending me a dollar or two on Patreon.
If you're broke, or if you don't like me that much, understandably, well, you can leave
a comment.
Tell me you love me.
The greatest love of all is happening to me.
The greatest love of all is inside me.
Patron Nick Wolf asks, who is the better hair, The Amazing Atheist or Thunderf00t?
Well, they both have real potential.
Thunderf00t has a lot of volume, but his hair is just extremely frizzy, probably because
it's dry.
Some deep conditioning and less frequent shampooing would fix this.
The Amazing Atheist has straight hair similar to mine, which is easier to manage, but again
it looks dry and wiry, probably due to inadequate conditioning.
I'm gonna have to go with Thunderf00t on this one, though, since if he'd just take better
care of it, his hair could really attain that early 18th century look, which I know isn't
everyone's jam, but it's certainly what I'm into.
Oh, and one more thing.
If you want to give me money but don't like recurring donations, I now have a PayPal link
in the description, so yay!
I love you.
