There's nothing like starting a new game of childhood to make me feel like a Pokémon
again.
Huh.
No option to play as a female character.
Wait, is that sexist?
Is this patriarchy?
Is this a trope versus women?
No!
Not here!
Not in my childhood!
I need a-
Get out of my childhood!
Oh god, I'm sorry.
Forgive me, sweet mother, dark mother, cold mother, kind mother, cruel mother.
Baby, I'm sorry.
I don't like arguing about feminism itself, because no one agrees what feminism means,
and if you call yourself a feminist you're vulnerable to what we might call the Trigglypuff
argument, where your opponent says, look at this dumb retarded feminist, and you end up
feeling like you have to apologize for something you never agreed with in the first place.
So let's just skip the debate about what feminism means, and about who is or isn't a feminist.
The important thing are the substantive issues, and one of the big ones is rape culture.
So let's start with that.
In the shitlord corners of YouTube, the consensus seems to be that there is such a thing as
a rape culture, but that it's only the province of Muslims and the blacks.
Sargon in particular has made this claim several times.
While I certainly agree that there are rape cultures in African and Muslim societies,
I don't think that we in the West are entirely off the hook.
I also think it's more important for us to establish whether or not there is a rape culture
in our own societies than it is to protest on behalf of people living in Africa, simply
because we have more influence over our own cultures than we do over what people are doing
in the Congo.
This is also my response to people who say, why are feminists complaining about first
world problems when there's still female genital mutilation in Egypt?
Well, if I could press a button and end female genital mutilation in Egypt, then I would.
But the truth is that I have no influence whatsoever over cultural traditions in North
Africa, whereas I do at least have a small influence over the people in my immediate
vicinity.
So if it turns out that there is a rape culture in America, then that has more of a moral
pull on me than whatever it is that people are doing in Somalia.
And to be clear, I'm not saying that you shouldn't care about female genital mutilation.
I agree that it's important to be an informed global citizen and all that shit.
I'm just saying that you have more influence and therefore more responsibility within your
own society.
So the question I'm addressing is whether there's a rape culture in Western society.
But this is actually a pretty bad way of framing the issue, since Western society is an extremely
vague term.
What counts as Western society?
Does Moldova count?
Does Australia?
Does Mexico?
But even if we restrict the topic to just one country, it remains unclear what it would
mean to say that, for example, American culture is a rape culture.
What is American culture?
Are we talking about hip hop culture?
Appalachian culture?
Juggalo culture?
This gets pretty complicated.
It's like doing my goddamn taxes.
The standard deduction must be prorated using the Maryland income factor.
Prorate the standard deduction using the following formula.
Standard deduction times Maryland income factor equals prorated standard deduction.
What the fuck is the Maryland income factor?
God damn it!
What do feminists mean when they say we live in a rape culture?
Who are we?
What is culture?
What is is?
Enlighten us, Socrates!
All of us will die before these questions are answered, so I'm going to push ahead with
a warning that clarifications might be necessary.
The phrase rape culture describes an environment where rape is normalized and justified and
where rape victims are shamed and blamed.
Certainly this accurately describes the culture of Congolese warlords and Homeric heroes,
but in a different way it also pertains to societies that do not openly endorse rape.
A common argument against the idea of first world rape culture has it that because rape
is illegal and because rape among crimes is reviled almost uniquely, there is no way that
say American society could be accurately described as a rape culture.
But of course there are also laws against drugs, and we're all taught that drugs are
bad in school, yet still there exists a drug culture.
Not that I know anything about drug culture.
I've read a couple articles about it.
One took over the line, sweet Jesus, one took over the line.
Shh!
Part of what's going on here is that our culture is in conflict.
On the one hand, there's our education and the law telling us that drugs are bad, and
on the other hand there's the psychiatric and pharmaceutical industries telling us that
drugs are the solution to anxiety and sadness, and on the third hand, there's the goddamn
media that glamorizes partying and hedonism.
As it should.
Those things are glamorous and fun.
Something similar is going on with rape.
On the one hand, we view rape as this crime to end all crimes, this abomination so fathomless
and evil that we dare not even joke about it.
And on the other hand...
There's almost an air of protesting too much about our hatred of rape.
It reminds me of our collective attitude toward pedophilia.
Overtly, we hate it so intensely that there are actually vigilante gangs of pedophile
hunters in reality TV shows dedicated to persecuting potential offenders.
At the same time, we fetishize youth and even childhood to such an extent that the explicit
disdain we hold towards pedophiles almost amounts to a kind of doublethink.
Likewise, I think our society is essentially conflicted about rape.
I also think that, far from being knocked down proof that there is no rape culture,
the exaggerated horror we reserve for an extreme idea of rape actually helps to provide cover
for more common everyday rape.
If rape is the worst of crimes and rapists are monsters, then why don't we feel like
we're looking at abject evil when confronted with an actual rapist, like, say, Brock Turner
of Stanford Dumpster fame?
Well, probably it's because fingering an unconscious woman for a few minutes is not the worst crime
humans are capable of, and Brock Turner is probably not a total monster.
In fact, if you're an upper-middle-class Stanford alum like the judge who sentenced
him to six months in county jail, he might even seem relatable and sympathetic.
But what Brock did still is rape, and it is illegal and immoral.
His crime just wasn't some kind of especially heinous law-and-order SVU-type situation.
So Christina buys him breakfast, he rapes her for lunch.
So there's a mismatch about what we say we think about rape and what we actually think.
The idea that psychopathy or some inherent and incorrigible moral defect is what leads
men to rape also supports the argument that teaching men not to rape is a hare-brained
feminist pipe dream.
Rapists know that rape is wrong, the argument goes.
You can't teach thieves not to steal.
Put your hands up if you have a lock on your front door.
Why do you do that?
Why do you put a lock-
Don't you even start.
Look, everyone agrees that the sentence rape is wrong is true because the word rape is
loaded with negative moral value.
The problem is not that rapists don't accept the truth of the proposition rape is wrong,
it's that they don't even think of their behavior as rape in the first place.
The people who argue that rapists know that rape is wrong have a bad theory about the
psychology of rapists.
In Brock Turner's statement in court, he said,
The same Broadly article that quote is from also quotes the vice president of the European
Men's Health Forum, who says,
Instead, the phrase you constantly hear them say is,
I thought she wanted it too.
A few years ago, there was an Ask a Rapist thread on Reddit, where rapists and people
who had almost committed rape shared their side of the story.
Very few of the rapists claimed to have been thinking at the time,
I know that rape is wrong, but I'm going to do it anyway, because I'm so evil.
Much more common is, that's when I thought she must have wanted it.
There's also a lot of rationalizing and justifying.
The men can't control themselves theory is very popular with rapists.
An erect penis has no conscience, as one rapist puts it.
And actually that's true, but you are not a slave to your penis, sir.
Blaming alcohol is also popular, which I take personal offense to since I've been drunk
since 2008 and I never raped anyone.
Now there are some exceptions to the rule that American rape culture is subtle.
Some fraternities have straight-up Mycenaean rape cultures that would make any ISIS rape
lord proud.
A few years ago, a Phi Kappa Tau member at Georgia Tech sent an email to his chapter
titled Luring Your Rape Bait, in which he describes a simple seven-step system for weaponizing
alcohol to coerce girls into sex, ejaculate inside of them, and shove them out of your
room.
Of course, the email also says, no raping, in all caps, so I guess it's not really rape.
There is no rape culture.
Case closed.
My theory about fraternity rape culture is that it begins with sadomasochistic hazing
rituals and just generally doing gay rapey shit to people who are unconscious.
This creates an atmosphere of disrespect for consent and bodily autonomy, which is propped
up by an ideology of male bonding, and comes to seem harmless and normal.
Then when women stumble into the lair, they're treated with the same lack of respect, mind
us the male bonding, and plus misogyny and social pressure to get laid by any means necessary,
and the result is rape.
Now, the existence of fraternity rape culture doesn't prove that America is a rape culture,
but that's not exactly what I'm trying to prove.
My point is that there are significant segments of American society that implicitly or explicitly
encourage rape.
The feminist blogosphere is part of American culture, but I don't think any feminist would
want to say that it's part of rape culture.
A corollary of this is that rape could probably be somewhat reduced by opposing these rapey
elements in American society.
There's an argument that goes,
While this might be strictly speaking true, I don't think it's the case that rape can't
be reduced.
How could it be reduced?
Well, for one, shut down the institutions that support rape culture.
Close down frat chapters that encourage or permit their members to rape.
Make consent a big part of sex education.
I know that shitlords argue we already teach men not to rape and no more education is necessary.
Telling women to stay home, to not drink, and to dress like nuns is the only option
we have, they say.
But I for one never really encountered a sophisticated discussion about consent until age 22, when
I received my cultural Marxist brainwashing from academic feminism.
In high school sex ed, I learned that abstinence is the only safe option.
I gave a class presentation on scabies, and that was about it.
There was nothing about determining whether someone is too intoxicated to consent or what
coercion looks like, though these topics are kind of complicated and, to a lot of people,
apparently not obvious.
Kids receive mixed messages about it from their peers, and so yes, I think good education
on the subject would in fact help.
And I don't think parents are doing an adequate job either.
Brock Turner's dad still can't really face the fact that his son is a rapist even after
he was convicted.
Most parents understandably don't want to believe that their child is capable of raping
someone.
This is another area where our idea of rapists as inhuman monsters actually gets in the way
of preventing rape.
The Brock Turner case is interesting because it illustrates some of the ways that there
are still remnants of rape culture in America, but it also illustrates how things have changed
for the better.
On the one hand, there is the tendency of the media, and for that matter the judge,
to sympathize with the rapist, to downplay his crimes, and to lament the ruined opportunities
that will result from the tragedy of his having raped someone.
On the other hand, Brock has been widely vilified on the internet.
His comparatively lenient sentence has been met with outrage, and the Vice President of
the United States has publicly declared his victim a hero.
This is the opposite of what we would expect from a rape culture, and it indicates that
major progress has been made on this issue.
I say progress because things used to be a lot worse.
I wasn't around in the 1960s, but I think that art and media history tell a pretty compelling
story.
Look at this scene from Goldfinger where the hero James Bond rapes Pussy Galore until her
body says yes.
Skip it.
I'm not interested.
Let's go.
What would it take for you to see things my way?
A lot more than you've got.
How do you know?
I don't want to know.
Isn't it customary to grant the condemned man his last request?
You've asked for this.
I'm going to skip the next 30 seconds of hilarious pre-rape jiu-jitsu.
Ah.
Now let's both play.
It's not rape if romantic orchestral music swells in the background.
It's pretty hard to imagine a script with a scene like that in it getting picked up
today.
But this sort of thing does still have its apologists, like in this video where professional
dating coach Adam Lyons teaches you to get girls like James Bond by being persistent
and not getting discouraged by resistance.
I'm not going to take no for an answer because I just refuse to do that because I'm a winner.
And winners, we don't listen to words like no or don't or stop.
Those words are just not in our vocabulary.
I know what you need.
And Adam Lyons knows what he's talking about.
Once voted least likely to get a girlfriend at school, he's internationally regarded as
one of the top three specialists on seduction.
I'm sold.
I think we're at a point where most of us find this unacceptable, but it's worth asking
why this progress has occurred.
I think a big part of it is that feminists have been complaining about this for literally
decades, and a lot of people, especially in media and academia, have finally listened
to them.
Sometimes to get things done you just have to complain for 40 or 50 years, and it's
not fun, and it sucks to listen to, but you just have to do it.
Eventually the culture changes, and then everyone pretends they were on your side all along,
as happened with gay rights and is currently happening with trans acceptance, and, I'm
happy to report, with opposition to rape culture.
The exception, of course, are the millions of troglodytes on YouTube still clinging to
justifiably outdated notions about sex and gender.
I'm not saying that everything feminism does is good, but that there isn't room
for justified critique, since even the most righteous social movements usually come with
us mattering of bad ideas.
No one is perfect.
Martin Luther King cheated on his wife and plagiarized his doctoral dissertation.
And if Thunderf00t and Sargon had been around in 1964, they probably would have been writing
articles decrying him as a cheater and a fraud.
They're just a couple of rational freethinkers pointing out the facts.
Fortunately, the bad ideas seem to fade out after a while, while the good ideas tend to
stick.
In the 1970s it was a popular talking point for the women's movement that PMS is a fiction
of patriarchal psychiatry.
This bad idea has vanished, while the good idea that women ought to have equal employment
opportunity has persisted.
So it's not that there's anything wrong with critiquing the weak ideas of social
justice movements.
I mean, that's probably what I'd be doing myself if YouTube weren't so inundated
with bullying shitlord response channel bullshit.
What I strongly oppose is this position that feminism is cancer, and feminism is the enemy,
and feminism poisons everything.
This is just reactionary and indefensible.
If you liked this video, please like, subscribe, and PM me your nudes.
It's alright, I'm a man on the internet who makes videos about rape.
What could be safer than that?
