This video is sponsored by Curiosity.
Zzzzzz-
Nnggh!
Uh! Uh! Uh! Oh!
Good evening, fellow brain-mind-explordinares!
Harris Bomberguy here!
Uh! Ugh!
Mm!
If there's one thing everyone knows about me,
it's that I love how corporations and branding
utterly dominate our culture.
The golden arches, the Nike tick,
the...whatever distinctive thing Burger King has.
These familiar designs help remind me I'm alive,
and the dopamine that pours from their food pipe
is like the warm embrace of an attractive friend,
with maybe some benefits if they pity you enough.
And golly, isn't it great when companies extol ideas
that accord with my own values?
It's like helping to spread a positive message
and make the world a better place.
And to show my support,
I bought a bunch of their stuff online.
I mean, you've got to support the heroes
fighting for the right cause.
After all, in what other way can we actually voice support
for making the world better in a society
where corporations have far more power
over our world than any of the people
who actually have to live in it?
Oh, that's depressing.
That's not going to be the point of the video, is it?
♪♪
The history of advertising,
according to what I remember from high school media studies.
Advertising has taken place for most of human history,
but with the invention of the printing press
and popularization of the newspaper,
it really took off.
Even as early as the 1800s,
you couldn't read your paper for updates
about the Fourth Anglo-Ashanti War
without some little fucker telling you about his bovril.
Invaluable to invalids and weak persons.
You can't say that.
Some people think of advertisements
as value-neutral.
It's just a piece of paper
or some video footage conveniently letting you know
about a thing that exists and what it does
so you can make an informed decision
about your potential purchase.
Sam, I don't have to cut myself to shave clothes.
This is the track two, the two-bladed razor from Gillette.
The blades are recessed so it's safer.
Because as we know,
humans are perfectly rational actors.
After all, capitalism works
because it's just in everyone's rational self-interest
to make a really good product.
No, wait, hang on. I forgot about human psychology.
You can just trick people into buying things.
Oops.
♪♪
It turns out that it's possible to convince people
to do things they wouldn't do otherwise
and probably shouldn't.
Advertising is really a large collection
of people trying to find the most effective way
of getting you to give your money to their bosses
to buy their thing.
It's a massive and very lucrative industry.
To put it the way this old cigarette commercial did,
we're gonna get ya.
One of the most effective ways to sell a product
is to tie it to someone's sense of value or their goals.
Owning this product will prove you're a successful person.
This product will make you irresistible
to women we made up.
Ooh!
Oh!
Maybe if you ate at a fast food restaurant more,
your children would love you, you piece of shit!
But the problem is this doesn't work forever.
Advertising has become more and more ubiquitous
and audiences stop paying attention to commercials
when they're a lot like ones they've seen
thousands of times before.
You have to push these ideas harder and harder
for them to work.
Over time, commercials became more and more brazen
in associating their products with power and sex
until it became so weird
it's almost indistinguishable from a joke.
Take this classic Big Mac poster
where the burger's on a red velvet bed
and it says,
stop staring at me like I'm some piece of meat.
Are you Mac enough?
Like, man enough?
Like, are you enough of a masculine manly man-man
to get into bed with this burger
and just go to town with your mouth?
But you are a piece of meat.
I—
Oh, I'm supposed to fuck this burger.
Duh-duh!
Duh-duh-duh!
By this point, advertisers had drilled so far down
into the human id,
they'd gone too far,
broken through all pre-existing Freudian evo-psych theories
and entered directly into the darkness of the human mind more,
to the place where you're paying a supermodel
to pretend to eat a burger in her bikini at the beach
because maybe horny viewers will want to do a sex so badly
they'll get hungry for a teriyaki burger.
God, that burger is definitely covered in sand at this point.
It would probably improve the flavor, though.
I love that the camera keeps cutting away
before any of it ever goes in her mouth
because it's basically poison.
No, don't eat the pineapple! It's evil! Don't!
So it was clear to advertisers that a new strategy was required.
Sex might sell,
but it doesn't stand out amongst a crowd of sex.
If you want people to pay attention,
you have to do something truly different.
["Cool Law"]
["Cool Law"]
Dah-dah, dah-dah-dah-dah-dah-dah-dah-dah-dah-dah...
Tch-tch-tch-tch-tch-tch-tch-tch-tch...
This UK commercial for Apple Earphones
is incredibly memorable,
even a decade later.
It's probably in the top three most well-known pieces
of video footage ever to grace our little aisles,
just behind the old Smash commercials
and the bit where Del Boy falls through the bar.
It's so weird and devoid of anything you'd expect from an ad
that it grabs your attention in a completely new way.
It's so memorable, except, of course,
for the part where it wasn't a commercial for earphones.
I made that up. It was for Cadbury's chocolate,
you gormless rube!
The last decade of marketing school graduates
are people who saw commercials like this
and the power and memorability they had
and went, yeah, I can do that exactly like that.
I'm gonna be weird, too.
But the problem with everyone trying to be weird
and different and stand out all at the same time
is they kind of all stopped standing out,
like, immediately.
So tons of commercials nowadays are just super out there
and bizarre and have nothing to do with the product,
but you still don't really notice or care
because you're already attuned to it.
Nowadays, the only ads that stand out
are, like, the ones that are just so bad
that you remember them to make fun of them.
Let's do that now!
Remember the shit Hydrobot?
Hydrobot at it again!
Who you remember specifically because
it's a really awkward and terrible way
of promoting...anything?
I don't think they sold many products
off the back of this thing.
People just remember it because...
Transformers razor.
You're gonna shave yourself with a razor
that's gonna fucking turn into a car
and cut your fucking face off?
Free your skin!
I do not want to free my skin!
What? What?
But worse than that,
this goes a layer deeper.
Remember the shit Hydrosilk robot?
You probably didn't because you've had
a trillion other deeply stupid things
flashed directly into your cortex.
But I remember it all.
I remember it, so you don't have to...
KILL ME!
Shick Hydrosilk.
Free your skin! Free your skin!
This commercial is currently unlisted
from Shick Hydrosilk's channel.
I can't imagine why.
With the creation of this, uh...
Titty Robot Adventure commercial,
it's clear that all pre-existing methods
of advertising are failing to work that well.
Plus, in a way, for the first time in a while,
there are less venues to advertise to people now
than there used to be.
A lot of people don't really watch television anymore
and consume content on their computers
with ad blockers enabled, the cowards!
If you use an ad blocker,
you're basically snatching the soy
from my savoring mouth!
Whenever a successful method
of getting your brand attention is found,
it's swiftly copied and repeated,
quickly rendering it useless.
The fastest cycle I've seen
is with the trend of weird brand Twitter,
like Wendy's having a go at people,
or Arby's making funny cardboard things,
or Sunny Delight's recent depression tweet.
These are meant to make the brand seem personal
and ironic and not like a corporation
who wants your attention and money,
but to a trained eye, they do the opposite.
A sizable company's not letting their media managers
run their accounts in this manner
unless they've done painstaking market research
and found it to be beneficial to do.
And what's more, since it's literally free to do this,
every even vaguely savvy brand's getting in on it,
which has swiftly made it a saturated format
that bores people and makes it lose the sense
that this is in any way unique.
I mean, if fucking Corn Nuts are getting in on it now,
it's not gonna work anymore.
Corn Nuts, the world's most underrated snack.
That's one way to channel the fact people don't like you.
Soon, it'll be so ubiquitous
that people just tune it out,
like all regular advertisements,
which means marketing companies are looking for a new way
to push their products into your consciousness,
and they've found it in a very strange place.
And it technically happened by accident.
Pfft.
Keurig.
Is it Keurig or is it Keurig?
Keurig?
Ugh, it's just—it's fine.
Look, I already recorded this bit,
so if I pronounce it wrong, whatever.
In late 2017, when American talk show host Sean Hannity
came to the defense of Roy Moore...
Everyone would agree. Everybody.
A 32-year-old man pursuing a 14-year-old girl is disgusting.
That is something we should all agree on.
This should transcend politics.
However...
...Media Matters president Angelo Caruso—
Wait, what if it's pronounced Carusoni?
Oh, I should have checked.
—among others asked coffee machine company Keurig
to reconsider sponsoring Hannity's show,
and Keurig responded by tweeting
that they were pulling their advertising.
At least four other companies pulled advertising
from Hannity's show for supporting Moore,
but Keurig visibly tweeting about doing it
and it getting a very large and vocal response
and support for having done it
caused a lot of sudden reactions.
In one corner of the Internet,
people were suddenly thinking about
buying a Keurig coffee machine.
I mean, they made a stand.
Uh, in a very minor way.
In another corner, marketing people, ad people,
people whose job is to see what causes this kind of splash
started watching closely and taking notes.
And in the saddest corner,
Hannity fans went berserk.
Oh!
Hope you're happy, Keurig.
Oh, yeah, that'll show them.
This video, published on the 12th of November,
one day after Keurig's tweet,
of self-appointed red pill aficionado
Angelo John Gage destroying his Keurig coffee machine
and making a huge mess of his garage in his pajamas.
Ah, but don't worry, he's wearing socks with his flip-flops,
so he's protected.
Has a shit ton of likes and retweets
and sparked hashtag Boycott Keurig,
a sort of pseudo-protest movement
where right-wing people, shocked and upset
that a company wouldn't give money to someone they watch
to sell them something they already own,
destroy their expensive, functioning coffee machines
they bought to spite the company
for this horrendous slight?
Uh, this, internally for Keurig,
was initially thought of as a terrible accident.
All these angry people harassing Keurig employees
and even the brief, though ultimately insignificant,
stink of a boycott, but secretly,
everyone was looking at how much attention
Keurig was getting.
You know what shows up a lot when there's a big hashtag
about boycotting Keurig going around for days?
The word Keurig.
The story about what Keurig did
and how people feel about it.
And it turns out that this is very similar to marketing.
Some people want to support Keurig
for the nice thing they did.
I mean, they took a stand by pulling some ads
from one TV show for a while.
And then there's the people who suddenly realized
that they could do with a coffee machine
since everyone's talking about them lately.
And then there's the flip side of almost every boycott,
which is the people who destroyed the thing that they own
realizing that they quite liked it
and, hey, no one's really paying attention
to whether or not I obey this boycott or not,
so maybe I'll just get another one.
It doesn't really make a big difference.
And then, of course, there's the simple fact
that people don't tend to go on with boycotts for very long.
It happens.
I hate to break it to you, but if you ever destroyed
something that you own as part of a protest
against a company's actions,
statistically, you bought another one.
And then you bought an extra one for one of your 2.14 kids.
Probably Kevin.
He gets all the nice things, doesn't he?
What's wrong with me, mother?
Don't you love me anymore?
Sure, it's hilarious.
These people are deeply foolish,
and it's good on some level
that sometimes advertisers don't support purveyors
of a garbage ideology,
but on the serious side,
the analysts watching and waiting in the background
learned an interesting lesson.
All of this is a goldmine.
It's more than a commercial.
It's a real-mercial.
That's my word. I just coined it.
Attribute it to me. Put it in the dictionary.
When you're the focus of a discussion online,
when you're a hashtag millions can click on and check out,
when you are the conversation for a brief moment
that everyone feels expected to think about and have a take,
not even an ad block can hide you.
Not even someone who doesn't watch TV
can miss your message.
The exposure was massive,
and it was effectively free.
And...I'm sorry.
I just need to stop for a second
to acknowledge how hilarious it is
that the guy, like, couldn't frame it properly
with his vertical phone video,
so it keeps falling out of the fucking frame.
Oh, Jesus.
When I saw this, I told myself,
the next time something like this happens,
it won't be an accident.
Nike.
For those of you who aren't aware,
it's pronounced Nike.
That's all right. I'm getting all high and mighty
about how to pronounce the one I know how to pronounce.
Just leave me alone.
In September of last year,
Nike pulled the trigger on a new commercial
celebrating 30 years of their Just Do It slogan.
The ad featured many great and famous athletes,
but also featured and was narrated by Colin Kaepernick.
Colin was 30 at the time,
which made him the same age as the slogan,
which was neat.
I guess he's always been the same age as the slogan.
How does time work?
This is a kind of cool commercial.
It's encouraging.
It prominently features
and celebrates black athletes for their success,
and it tacitly endorses Kaepernick's activism,
which goes a little beyond kneeling, by the way.
He's done a lot of work and given a lot of support
to organizations that do some really great stuff.
This is 100% the most tasteful
and inspiring shoe commercial
I've ever seen in my life.
But the commercial's content or quality
wasn't really the point.
The point was what happened next,
and we all knew what was gonna happen next.
Everyone who you can expect to be mad
about people protesting police brutality
got mad, and in a show of impotent rage
at a shoe company
for making bad commercial Mino-like,
destroyed some of their personal property
and started the hashtag
burnyournikes
and tried to start a boycott.
Our sound man just cut the Nike swoosh off his socks.
Former Marine.
Get ready, Nike.
Multiply that by the millions.
Looks like he's never used scissors before.
Nah, he was just so wound up,
he didn't take time.
It's a wonder he didn't cut himself.
You think we'll roll over on shit like this?
My troop friend was so mad at his socks,
he couldn't even—
Not only am I burning my favorite pair of Nikes,
you are burning your sales.
You think that's gonna happen?
Over here, in reality,
these bizarre, property-immolating protests
against Nike for daring to feature a man
who said police brutality was bad
made everyone want to talk about Nike
and how cool they were being
and make fun of these people
for days on end.
Nike was being given
hundreds of millions of dollars of free advertising
by people trying to punish them.
Nike's value went up by—
Are you ready for this?
Six billion dollars.
By jolly, governor,
that's a lot of shoes.
Why did I do that?
And they couldn't have done it
without dozens of sad little boys
telling you just how much
birdbrained little shitheads like them hate Nike.
Congratulations, kid.
Throwing this in the fire
because of Colin Kaepernick
is now the face of Nike.
Take this, Nike.
Take this, Nike.
He thinks he's hurting Nike by doing this.
Six billion dollars.
Six billion dollars.
Five pairs of shoes in there,
all gonna let them—
Five pairs of shoes!
He bought one of those, like, three days ago, right?
You can still wear them.
You can just not buy more!
He can't even shut the fucking thing properly!
And the National Anthem's fucking blaring!
Ah-ha-ha-ha!
Fuck!
It's so good!
I forgot how good it is!
Ah-ha-ha!
So if these angry losers,
almost accidentally stabbing themselves
or giving themselves third-degree burns
in protest against their functioning property,
were trying to disincentivize support for progressive ideas,
they accidentally did the opposite.
Instead, they guaranteed it would happen again.
Oops!
Which brings us to Gillette.
Although, given my luck, it's pronounced
Gillette-y.
On the 13th of January,
Gillette released a commercial entitled
We Believe the Best Men Can Be.
Sorry, not a commercial.
A short film.
It's about how sexism is bad
and you shouldn't follow women around in the street
when they're minding their own business
and don't let your kid hit other kids.
You know, like, basic stuff.
It's a piece that encourages men to improve themselves
in the really hard way,
where you question your ingrained behaviors
and think about how to encourage better ones.
It's not the sort of self-improvement advice
men tend to get, frankly.
It's quite hard to pass this sort of thing at first
when you've spent your life being told the solution
is to clean your room,
go to the gym,
and convince yourself that being shitty to people
is actually charisma and proves you have
more of a personality than them.
The response was...
predictable.
It's almost as if they intended for it
and that was the point
and they wanted it to happen.
Stable, clever boys and a few girls
from all over the internet emerged
to provide an example of their version
of masculinity in action
by screaming and crying
that a commercial said sexism was bad.
The commercial itself, anything it said or did,
didn't really matter.
A commercial gets shown a couple of times
and then it goes away.
What really mattered was this behavior.
It made Gillette the talk of the internet
for several full days
as all of the rights, thought, leaders,
bit of a misnomer, they don't seem to have had any yet,
all emerged to have their own personal
two-minute hate tweetstorm at Gillette,
not realizing that they were the actual commercial
for Gillette.
The Gillette commercial is the product
of mainstream radicalized feminism
and emblematic of
CULTURAL MARXISM.
It's actually pronounced
Stop perverting masculinity.
Let little boys wrestle.
I'm sorry, Candace. It's too late.
The Marxists are going door to door
and preventing boys from wrestling.
Now, I could just laugh at these rubbish tweets
for another 20 minutes,
but instead we're gonna cut right
to the funniest one of them all.
An account named War Room tweeted,
Goodbye Gillette. Hello Schick.
Oh, sweet. Another gentleman ready to
free his skin.
This tweet was connected to a picture he'd taken
of his Gillette razor floating in a toilet.
It was shared pretty widely,
so apparently this counts as a form of protest now,
but I can't help but imagine
the few seconds that happened
after this picture was taken.
Heh, heh, heh, heh.
This'll show him. Heh, heh.
Oh.
I have to get the razor out of the toilet now.
I have to reach into the toilet with my hands
and take it out.
I should have thought a bit harder about this,
shouldn't I?
I can't stop marveling at the majesty of it.
Speaking briefly,
as a man whose body is in, like,
the top 90 percentiles of testosterone,
I've checked.
That's why I'm gonna be bald by I'm 28.
Look forward to that, future subscribers.
I really don't get it.
I don't make a habit of questioning
other people's masculinity
because I think the concept is
super murky and basically made up
and nothing's to be gained from that,
but I do think there is a statement here
about the status of modern Western men
in the fact that millions of them
seemingly dropped fucking everything
to be mad at a commercial.
Like, what the fuck?
Aren't we supposed to be hunting the mammoth?
Like, screaming at Gillette
doesn't feed the tribe,
you fucking low-T baiter.
I can say that, by the way,
because I have more and I'm going bald.
I have to wear it so I get to make the joke.
Fuck you!
Anyway, Gillette, Keurig, and Nike
all successfully boosted their products
and their image by way of relying on
backlash from weirdos, and it worked.
They probably all made quite a lot of sales,
which reminds me.
My box of stuff from all of my favorite
progressive-sounding companies arrived.
Ooh, I wonder what's in it.
What's this?
That's weird.
I'm not sure what this is.
What could it possibly be?
Oh, it's child labor.
♪♪
Aw, yeah, here it comes, baby.
The generic 10-minute rant about how capitalism is bad
that I do at the end of every video now.
That's right, I made yet another video
to turn out to secretly be all about capitalism.
You thought I couldn't do it, but I did.
Don't ever question me again!
You don't need me to lecture you
through Nike's history of sweatshop labor
or their ongoing allegations of poor work conditions
often pulling production from factories
that threaten to unionize
and refusing to let the Workers' Rights Consortium
inspect their factories.
You don't need me to go into exacting detail
about Gillette's owners, Procter & Gamble,
a giant corporation who are implicated
in all kinds of stuff,
or the general way big businesses
are unethical on so many levels.
I'm not even gonna get into the pink tax,
the way companies like Gillette
can often say vaguely progressive things
but will happily charge women more
for effectively the same product
if they think they can get away with it.
And don't even get me started on Keurig.
Their coffee isn't very nice.
And also a bunch of labor violations.
You know most of this stuff happens already,
and we all know it's bad.
I'm not saying you should personally feel bad
for buying the products of these companies either.
Almost every company has something
in their production chain which,
if you sat and looked at it,
you'd probably find unethical.
That's the world we live in,
and we don't change it by feeling bad
about our tacit participation.
We change it by trying to find ways
of altering the way things are.
The point here is that businesses exist
to make money.
Sometimes that's in the form of moving jobs
to a country that does it cheaper,
often because they don't have to treat
their workers as well.
Sometimes it's in the form of fiddling
their taxes so much that not only did they
pay less taxes than you,
you technically paid them.
Sometimes it's in the form of charging women
more for pink razors,
and sometimes it's in finding new ways
to make you think about buying their product.
These clips sound nice.
Inspirational, even.
They say things that not only do I agree with,
but which I think are normal
and not in the slightest bit radical.
But they're commercials.
Their purpose is to sell you things.
They're a marketing strategy
with little to no impact on the actual problems
that threaten our world.
I mean, heck, they won't even admit
their commercials are commercials anymore.
They're short films.
It's got a cinematic aspect ratio,
so you know it's classy and not an ad.
There's this sequence where they play
an old Gillette ad and symbolically
break through it as if to surpass it,
but this is all window dressing designed to disguise
that you are being sold something.
It's really insidious to me how completely
companies are trying to mask the fact
that that's what they're doing.
They're still just trying to find a way to get you,
and it turns out that people don't go
for hiring a model to pretend to eat
a sandy pineapple burger anymore.
They go for something that sounds
really progressive and forward-thinking
and that all the weirdos on Twitter
seem to be mad about.
It's just like dear old dad always used to tell me.
Son, there is no ethical consumption under capitalism.
Actually, that's a lie.
That's my fantasy.
Dad mostly just sat in the corner
and read Victor Klemperer books.
But I'm the Victor Klemperer of my age, father!
I tell everyone which video games are bad!
Brands are not our friends,
but it is nice, isn't it?
I mean, I can make fun of people for buying razors
just to spite some weirdos online
or for liking a commercial or whatever,
but it is pretty cool that a company
actually invited discussion of these issues.
Just keep in mind that there are deeper problems
with these companies that we do need to talk about and solve,
and don't let them buy your allegiance
by saying something vaguely progressive-sounding
in a commercial.
Besides, there are better, less invasive,
more genuine ways of getting your product
out there to people.
Which brings me to CuriosityStream.
CuriosityStream is a subscription streaming service
that offers over 2,000 documentaries
and non-fiction titles from some of the world's
best filmmakers, including exclusive originals
made specifically for the platform.
It's created by John Hendricks,
the guy who founded the Discovery Channel,
and I really enjoyed a series on there
called History of Food,
which tracks the invention of cooking
millions of years ago,
the development of processes like fermentation
and bread-making and how this allowed civilization
to prosper, all the way to the modern food industry
and its more modern problems.
I am currently in the process of making a couple of videos
about diet science and junk diets and stuff like that,
so if you watch this series,
you'll know exactly where I stole everything from.
Access to everything on the platform
costs $2.99 a month or $19.99 a year,
but if you go to curiositystream.com
slash hbomberguy,
your membership will be free for the first 30 days.
Hey, thanks for watching the commercial
all the way through, too.
I think now would be a good time to bring up
that this stuff can all happen
in the opposite direction, too.
Watch out for right-wing commercials
that promote traditional values
or are weirdly loving of Donald Trump.
Uh, I mean, there's already, like, a watch commercial
that's, like, a response to the Gillette thing
where they're like, men have it way hard in there.
The next time a commercial like that comes out,
which it will because this stuff goes in any direction,
marketing companies know what they're doing,
just don't worry about it.
You know, like, there are so many important problems
in the world right now that are worth talking about
and worth solving,
and in the scheme of that,
commercials that say something you don't like
are effectively a trick to waste your time,
and your time is better spent than that
because I love you,
and there are people in your life right now,
even you, who could benefit from that time,
so spend it on them instead.
You have my permission now.
Heh. I guess.
Um, and I hope you have a really great night.
Do something you enjoy.
I've been really into hummus lately.
Check that out, and look up cool time management skills
if you haven't. It turns out it's a really great thing.
I got this video out, like, two weeks early.
Um, yeah, take care of yourselves,
and, uh, have a good night,
and brands are not your friends.
Um, thanks, CuriosityStream, for the sponsorship.
HAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHA
I'm screwed.
Uh, love yourself, and take care.
Bye.
Oh, I also have a Patreon.
Oh, I forgot to...
