Let's take Professor Richard Linden, for instance, who has produced paper after paper
showing that climate sensitivity is around a quarter to a seventh of what the Euro has
changed. That means three watts per square meter, all anthropogenic forcings estimated
by the IPCC, 0.8, five times as much forcing for natural causes.
The question I asked in my first video on Moncton is, why do people believe him? And
here we start to get an insight. Here he is on national television in Australia debating
a professional climate scientist and easily getting the better of him. You can tell Dr
Ben McNeill is thinking, shit, I thought this would be a pushover. I wish I'd prepared.
Yes, McNeill would have been wise to find out a bit more about Moncton and his arguments
before coming on the programme, because Moncton certainly did his homework on McNeill.
With all respect, you are not an expert on the central question in this debate, which
is climate sensitivity. How much warming will you get if you add CO2 to the atmosphere?
And he's right. McNeill isn't an expert on climate sensitivity. He's an expert on carbon
dioxide absorption in oceans, which is the subject of most of his research. So when Moncton
turns to an area outside of McNeill's expertise, Moncton can pretty well make any claim he
likes without fear of contradiction. Let's face it, he sounds bold, confident, eloquent
and sure of his assertions. McNeill can't check whether Moncton's claims are correct.
Neither can the interviewer. But we can. So that's exactly what we're going to do.
First, let me explain some terms that you'll hear a lot. Put simply, forcing is the amount
of warming caused by whatever might be warming the Earth. It could be the sun, or a greenhouse
gas or a light reflective surface turning into a darker one. The amount of forcing or
warming due to a doubling of CO2 levels is pretty much agreed on by all climatologists.
Richard Linson, the skeptic everyone likes to quote, says this figure is about 3.5 watts
per square metre, as noted in the last three IPCC scientific assessments. The IPCC actually
puts the figure at 3.7 watts per square metre, but there's a margin of error, so we're in
the same ballpark. When forcing increases, the average global surface temperature rises
until it reaches a stage where the amount of energy leaving the Earth is about the same
as the amount of energy being pumped in by the forcing. This is called the equilibrium
temperature and in its most basic form it's very easy to work out. Temperature equals
forcing times lambda, which is the Earth's sensitivity. It's usually written as delta
T to denote a change in temperature in response to delta F, a change in forcing. So forcing
is like a heater in a cabin, and sensitivity tells us the final temperature the cabin will
reach in response to that heat. It's important to understand the difference between forcing
and sensitivity, because as we'll see in a minute, Moncton gets them completely mixed
up. If no other factors are involved, climate sensitivity is about 0.27, so if we plug in
a forcing of 3.7 watts per square metre caused by a doubling of CO2, we'd get an increase
in temperature of about 1 degree centigrade. This is also generally agreed on by all climate
scientists. Unfortunately, other factors are involved. As the Earth warms towards this
level, changes happen that tend to amplify and reduce the warming, known as positive
and negative feedback. Lindsen argues that more water vapour will produce more clouds,
which reflect sunlight and may act as a negative feedback, outweighing all the positives. The
reason this isn't generally accepted is because other climatologists have found flaws in Lindsen's
hypothesis. For one thing, it only encompasses the tropics, not the whole Earth. And even
clouds in the tropics not only reflect sunlight and act as a negative feedback, they also
send outgoing longwave radiation back to Earth, and so act as a positive feedback. And the
other reason Lindsen's hypothesis doesn't fit is that researchers working in a completely
different field, geology, found that the feedback effects from CO2 in the past were clearly
positive, not negative. So these various feedbacks have to be plugged in to find out
what the Earth's sensitivity really is, and therefore what the equilibrium temperature
will be. Modelling is just one of many different ways sensitivity can be determined. Glaciologists
and geologists determine sensitivity by looking at how global temperatures changed according
to carbon dioxide level rises in the past. A review of the various results from a dozen
different methods, each denoted by a different colour, shows that nearly all cluster around
the 2 to 4.5 degree range. I'll squash them up so we can see them in one frame. The thicker
lines show more results and greater probability. Individual results that are well outside the
cluster, known as outliers, are marked with crosses. So let's just pick a result at random.
This study, for instance, shows that global temperatures will rise by 10 degrees because
of a doubling of CO2. And this one, for instance, says the same thing. So we now know that temperatures
will rise by 10 degrees, which is three times higher than the IPCC estimate. What do you
mean that's nonsense? Rats. The Moncton fans have spotted what I did. Yes, I completely
ignored the majority of results clustered in the middle and just happened to deliberately
pick the most extreme outliers. Then I pretended that they were representative of the body
of evidence and claimed that we know these results are correct. You could just as easily
pick a couple of studies from the opposite extreme and do the same thing. But who would
do something as obviously bogus as that? Let's take Professor Richard Linden, for instance,
who has produced paper after paper showing that climate sensitivity is around a quarter
to a second. So now we're beginning to see Moncton's performance in context. He cherry-picked
extremely low figures that are clearly outside the range of most research. Then he conveys
the impression that this result is correct, undisputed, known and settled. The biggest
problem is that a number of papers have found flaws in the research of Lindsen, Douglas
and Knox and Moncton makes no mention of this. Here's my own calculation and we get 1.6 degrees
Celsius as the change in temperature for a doubling of CO2. The warming we would expect
to get if we doubled the CO2 concentration in the atmosphere, that is what's known as
climate sensitivity, will be about a fifth of a Celsius degree, just a little bit more
than a fifth of a Celsius degree. In his piece in the Forum on Physics and Society newsletter,
Moncton gives yet another figure for temperature rise, 0.58 degrees centigrade. Which one Moncton
decides to settle on really doesn't matter, because we'll see that his calculation method
is nonsense anyway. He laid it out in the APS newsletter piece. I'm not going to go
over the whole thing because people far better qualified than me have already done that. I'll
just point out one of the most egregious errors that even the most scientifically illiterate
can grasp. It concerns the figure for forcing, which Moncton initially puts at 3.405 watts
per square metre. Okay, this is lower than the accepted estimate of 3.5 to 3.7, but never
mind, that small beer compared to what he does next. He divides it by three. So he now
gives us a forcing of just 1.135 watts per square metre. Moncton says this is to take
account of the observed failure of the tropical mid-troposphere to warm as projected by the
models, citing a paper by Richard Linson. But whether the tropical mid-troposphere warms
as projected or not, this isn't forcing. It's sensitivity. Nowhere in the cited paper does
Linson cut forcing. In fact, Linson specifically says in the same paper that forcing is 3.5
watts per square metre for a doubling of CO2. Nowhere near Moncton's 1.135. Surely
no-one who testifies to Congress on the subject of climate could possibly mix up sensitivity
and forcing, especially in what he claims is his peer-reviewed paper. That would be
like confusing time and distance, or pressure and volume. They're two completely different
things. But then our old ally comes along to show that's exactly what he did. In an
attempt to hit back at his critics, Moncton justified his decision by citing a passage
from Linson's 2007 paper. He made a mistake on the date, by the way. But it's obvious
that in the passage Moncton quotes, Linson is talking about sensitivity, not forcing.
After reading the critiques of his calculation, Moncton obviously and rather belatedly realised
this. But instead of admitting his mistake, Moncton decides to simply substitute one word
for another, as if no-one will notice. In his rebuttal, he justifies dividing sensitivity
by three. But if we check back with his APS piece, we can see he didn't do any such thing.
He divided forcing by three, and he says so. It even came in a section titled, radiative
forcing reconsidered. I don't think anyone could show more clearly that Moncton mistook
sensitivity for forcing than this attempt at a rebuttal by Moncton himself. So as impressive
as Moncton's equations may seem, and as clever as they make Moncton look in front
of audiences, they're nonsense. The trouble is, audiences do get dazzled by sums and symbols,
and can't tell the difference between good physics and crap.
If we apply that equation to this question of whether the clouds building up would make
the earth warmer or cooler, we get an extremely clear answer. It would make it cooler if you
had more clouds. I'm not going to go through this calculation now. You'll be glad to
hear it. Anyone who's nerdy enough to want to follow it, get my slides and read the text
underneath.
Please sir, I'm nerdy enough. First, another quick explanation. Albedo is the reflectivity
of a surface. So a black surface will have a very low albedo and a warming effect because
it doesn't reflect much radiation. A white or shiny surface will have a very high albedo
and a cooling effect. So let's go to the slides. Moncton's hypothesis on this is called
bears crap in the woods. Here we demonstrate very easily that increasing the earth's albedo
has a very large cooling effect. Well, yes, that was easy. Since increasing albedo has
a cooling effect, Moncton has successfully demonstrated that increasing albedo has a
cooling effect, and sitting under a shade has a shading effect. Then Moncton imagines
the earth without an atmosphere, so that an increase in cloud cover is represented by
an increase in whiteness on the planet's surface. Again, no arguments about the result.
If you paint dark areas of a planet white, you increase the albedo and cool it down.
Moncton concludes that therefore, the higher the albedo, the cooler the planet. Well, no,
that's different. A cooling effect is not the same as saying that one thing will be
cooler than another. The best way to empirically show that this is crap is to apply it to a
couple of planets. Venus has a very high albedo of around 0.75, while Mercury is less
than 0.1. So according to Moncton, Venus should be much cooler than Mercury. In fact, it's
hotter, even though it's much further from the sun. Why? Because it has an atmosphere.
Of course, Moncton eliminated the earth's atmosphere in order to do his hypothetical
calculation, but as we can see from the example of Venus and Mercury, this hypothetical exercise
leads to a hypothetical result that doesn't match reality. So let's come back to the real
world and put the earth's atmosphere back. Now, instead of just reflecting solar radiation
and cooling the earth down, the clouds do what they do in the real world. They also
stop radiation escaping from earth and add warming. In his speeches, of course, Moncton
doesn't tell his audience that his proof requires the omission of the atmosphere. Well then,
is there anyone who can support Moncton on this? Now, this paper was written in 2005
by a satellite nerd named Pinker. He is wholly unconcerned with the global warming debate.
And what he found was this, that there was a significant, naturally occurring decline
in cloud cover between 1983 and 2001. So what we know from this is that something like four
fifths of the warming over that period in the satellite era, when we can work out what
caused it, was in fact caused by a change in cloud cover. The radiative forcing, the
change in temperature forced by something happening was naturally occurring. Cloud cover
change of three watts per square meter. Hold that thought while we watch a clip from Annie
Hall. I think that my insight into Mr. McLuhan will have a great deal of validity. Oh, do
you? Well, that's funny because I happen to have Mr. McLuhan right here. So, so, yeah,
just let me, let me, let me come over here a second. Oh, I heard what you were saying.
You know nothing of my work. You mean my whole fallacy is wrong. How you ever got to
teach a course in anything is totally amazing. Boy, if life were only like this. Well, sometimes
life is like that. When Monckton again pontificated on the work of Dr. Pinker at a debate in Australia,
his opponent Tim Lambert was ready for him. So here we have an enormous, naturally occurring
forcing verified in Pinker's paper by four separate methods. Lambert did the next best
thing to dragging Pinker on stage. He had a recording of someone reading a statement
from her. The CO2 radiative forcing value that Mr. Christopher Monckton is quoting refers
to the impact on the Earth's radiative balance. The numbers that we quote in our paper represent
the change in surface shortwave radiation due to changes in the atmosphere. Clouds,
water vapour, aerosols. These two numbers cannot be compared at their face value. To
the best of my understanding, this is the source of the misunderstanding. This might
seem amusing, but several months after hearing Dr. Pinker's words for himself, Monckton was
still misrepresenting her paper, this time to members of Congress. This is Dr. Pinker's
paper establishing that the warming of that period was caused largely by a naturally occurring
reduction in cloud cover, extra sunlight reaching the ground. For some reason they preferred
to hear an explanation of Dr. Pinker's work from Monckton rather than Dr. Pinker. So once
again Pinker had to issue a rebuttal, this time to Congress, detailing Monckton's misreading
and misunderstanding of her research. I'm going to testify not of course as a scientist
because I'm not one, but as a policy maker. And the role of policy makers when confronted
with scientists is to know what questions to ask and I'm going to raise one or two questions
now. It relies on a bogus statistical technique. It is defective as I shall now show. Not very
much warming is going to happen. The reality however is just 0.7. The IPCC should not have
used that first graph. Let us now see what the true position is. The conclusion from
this is that we can explain the warming by other methods.
