Hi, I'm Heritance Flimby, and welcome to Serious Law Analysis.
I had another topic prepared for this week's SLAH, but something very pressing came up
at the last minute that desperately needs addressing immediately.
You're no doubt aware of the announcement for Super Mario Odyssey, the trailer for which
features everyone's second favorite Italian fascist journeying to New Donk City?
A world that somewhat resembles our own, populated by realistically proportioned people instead
of other Mario-type people.
The gameplay footage has an uncanny feel to it, of a world with textures and architecture
and design a wide margin less cartoony than Mario, dwarfing him in size and complexity.
And the internet, correctly, freaked the fuck out about this.
So this time, apart from a certain other popular franchise
mascot, I thought I'd interrogate precisely why this move would elicit this sort of response,
and try to understand why Nintendo would even consider doing this horrible, horrible thing.
Cut to the-
We seemingly naturally understand this choice as a grotesque, weird thing.
Nintendo are horrifically distorting the visual reality of their game's universe, like they
did with the aptly named Weird Mushrooms in Mario Maker.
Oh, Jesus Christ!
You can call me pretentious, and believe me, many have tried, but when people describe
things like this as, like the magic being stolen, and so on, these are codes for feeling
uncomfortable in a way that's hard to explain, and as a man, I love lecturing people on what
their feelings actually mean, so let's try to figure out these feelings.
Why exactly is this so traumatizing for children and adults who film themselves watching advertising?
Well, it really goes back to the inherent appeal in the design of mascot characters
like Mario or Sonic in the first place.
I mean, you can break the visual design of these characters down to their DNA, we can
talk about roundness, softness, and acutely large or innocent-looking eyes, or interplay
of base colors like blue and red with a soft orange for skin tones.
But we have to go deeper!
I can't be bothered to Google the Inception Horn sound effect, just pretend I made that
joke here.
Because it's easy to list specific things people find cute or visually appealing, the
question is why, and that means delving into the psychology aspect of these characters
and stories, which is more than just visual design, it's also to do with presentation
and personality.
Let's look at what Mario does.
What contributes to the appeal of this character equally as much as his design is his attitude
and behavior in games.
He's perpetually in a good mood, he's happy-go-lucky, energetic, easily amused, and easy to please.
Look how happy he is to have got a sh-shine?
He probably doesn't even know what those are, and he's still happy to have one.
You might have noticed that all these characteristics are also characteristics of those cute animals
we all know and love.
Puppies are also perpetually amused, endlessly energetic and happy, and don't have to think
about real problems.
Yes, actual real puppies go to the bathroom, but when we think of these animals, our brain
ignores those bits and fixates on all this cute stuff, just like it does playing a Mario
game.
Mario also lives in a world that permits cuteness.
He's never punished for being optimistic.
He can save the day when he puts his mind to it, and the world of Mario has been weirdly
scrubbed of certain real-world problems and questions that it would be uncomfortable to
actually have to deal with in a cartoon universe.
There are certain questions the Mario universe doesn't let you think about.
For example, what are Boos the ghosts of?
See?
That question probably just weirded you out just a little bit, didn't it?
It's because you suddenly have to take into account that in this happy, silly world, people
die.
This is why Boos are so vague and scrubbed of identity, because otherwise, if they looked
like the ghost of a dead person, that invites a lot of, like, weirdness that kind of gets
in the way of the idea of being in this fun cartoon, you know?
After death, the other main thing Nintendo works to remove reminders of in their games
is, well, kind of obviously, sex.
Because you see, sex is a kind of scary and complicated thing to a lot of people, and
it's not something we ever really quite understand, but it's inherent to the real world, sadly.
There's no way we can stop it from happening yet.
Nintendo have worked very hard to remove sex from their ideological universe, up to and
including the part where Bowser has lots of kids, but you never see the mother and
she's never ever mentioned.
In Mary of Sunshine, it's briefly brought up that Bowser Jr. thinks Peach is his mother,
but when it's revealed that she isn't—because of course she isn't!
OHHH!—they immediately move past the idea of raising the question of his mother's identity.
Nintendo doesn't want people to think about this because—oh, Jesus.
The images in my head are not—I'm not happy about this.
They don't just emerge fully formed into the Mario universe.
Heck, in Super Mario World 2, hashtag Yoshi's Island, it turns out that not even Mario
is the product of, like, natural processes.
A fucking stork carries him into the world.
Storks exist entirely in folklore so parents could avoid telling kids about what sex and
childbirth were?
So now, and here's the million-dollar question, why are we so attracted as audiences to creatures
that don't have a care in the world and story universes where the people never have
to think about complicated problems like sex, death, or having to stick to a diet of more
than mushrooms you magically find in blocks?
And where cholesterol is real and it—it's probably gonna be the thing that kills you.
What do we always say, Mario?
Hey, you slob!
That's my pizza!
You see, it all goes back to everyone's favorite depressing Frenchman, Jean-Paul Sartre.
Sartre argued that life is so scary, burdensome, and full of bizarreness and doubt that humans
encounter anguisse at the living nightmare of being.
That's anguish if you speak a real language.
We're screaming tubes of meat and we're all going to die.
And on a deep level, we know this and we don't like being reminded about that.
This is why, for example, many people are squeamish about seeing blood or injuries.
It's a reminder of our mortality.
So according to sssssssto...
We live our lives in ways that avoid encountering reminders like this.
We empathize with dogs because we idolize their state of being.
We wish we could go through life perpetually amused, always happy without having to stop
and think about death or mortgages or how the Switch is inevitably going to be ruined
by Nintendo's usual bullshit.
Like I said before, there are certain questions the Mario universe doesn't want you to ask
of it, and the important point I want to make here is that that's why people like it.
Everyone likes a joke, you know,
Oh, Peach keeps inviting Mario over for some cake!
Could cake be a euphemism for something?
I would like you to stop making that joke.
And I have a good reason why, though.
Uh, first of all, it's just a bit crude, you know.
But secondly, in the words of Sigmund Freud,
sometimes a cake is just a cake.
That's kind of the core appeal of Mario if you think about it for a few seconds.
Mario is satisfied by just the idea of going and hanging out with someone and eating cake
Like that would be a good day for him.
And that would be enough.
He doesn't need to, like, look for a romantic sexual partner.
He's just this guy who's happy all the time.
He says wahoo all day for no reason.
Just when he jumps, he's a happy man.
And that's precisely why people like him.
It's basic escapism.
Mario World, like a puppy YouTube compilation,
is a place you can visit and briefly forget that you have real problems.
In the words of Samuel Wonson,
he who makes a beast of himself gets rid of the pain of being a man.
We enjoy putting ourselves in the minds of people like Mario
and idolize real-world creatures with simple mindsets
because we're all trying to escape the pain and suffering of being human.
And this immediately explains the revulsion people feel seeing footage of New Donk City.
In sending Mario to a realistic place with people who look like they have real problems,
the ideological spell, the magic, if you will, of Mario is broken.
And this understandably makes people uncomfortable.
The comparisons to Sonic Adventure and Sonic 06 are very apt too.
They create the exact same cognitive dissonance.
In Sonic 06, Sonic has a relationship with romantic elements
with a human-ass human girl-woman,
and in a moment of passion, she...
Sonic loves Chili Dogs too much to ever need to touch a woman.
And maybe, just maybe, that's why nerds like him.
Have Nintendo pulled a Sonic 2006
and just forgotten the core appeal of their most important mascot?
Yeah, sure.
Since what if Nintendo made horrible decisions with core franchises?
Oh, fuck.
Oh, fffffuuu—
Interestingly enough, the game's literally named after The Odyssey.
The Odyssey was a story by Homer,
some pretentious guy who just went by his first name.
It came out in about the mid-1940s?
It's about a guy who, after losing all his friends
and wasting a bunch of his life on a war the government sent him on,
spends about ten years trying to get home,
going on all kinds of scary and philosophically intriguing adventures
in weird places on the way.
It's a classic educational fantasy journey,
very clearly inspired by Doctor Who or the Magic School Bus.
In every chapter, Odysseus goes to a new place and learns an important lesson,
like how shit it would be if he got eaten by a giant,
or how confusing it would be if his name was Nobody.
Overall, Homer's Odyssey is a solid 8 out of 10 story
about getting accustomed to alien surroundings,
a testing of a person's characteristics,
and ultimately the story asks if you can ever really return home
when the journey inherently changes what you even are.
So what does a reference to this historic work say about Mario's journey?
Is New Donk City just another place Mario can visit and then leave unscathed,
like the Ice World, the Fire World,
or the and Sonic at the Olympic Games...
Or is it a journey that will forever change him
and teach him horrifying lessons about the obscene cruelty
of this world of...
...Humans?
Nah, I'm just kidding.
Life in New Donk City probably isn't that complicated.
Heck, the villain probably lives in a giant golden tower...
...with his name written on it.
Thanks for watching!
Don't forget to like, rate, subscribe, rate,
give me the thumbs, uh, tumble my dumble,
check me out on livestream.linkedin.org,
subscribe, and subscribe.
And now, because without our corporate overlords I will surely starve,
here's a commercial for Loot Crate.
Go to lootcrate.com slash...
They didn't accept my affiliate claim.
This week's Loot Crate contains...
...happiness.
Oh, sweet.
There is, however, a tracer, uh, bobblehead in here.
That's nice.
Hey, that reminds me of someone else whose purpose in life is to go fast.
I...
You.
You.
You.
Thank you all very much for watching,
and thanks to everyone who continues to support me making this stuff.
In addition to the names going past the screen right now,
I'd like to thank...
A mysterious benefactor.
A pair of huge googly eyes on a flaccid penis.
Aseline.
Alex Lemkevich.
Alexander Corbett.
Alicia Parker Martell.
Amy Lech.
Anna S.
Ash Stryker.
Bill Mock.
Billy Layden.
Brennan Arts.
Brock Barber.
Caden Patin.
Caleb McMurphy.
Casey Schneibel.
Christopher Wade.
Kieran.
Corwin Light-Williams.
Damien Edney.
Daniel Vincent Chilton.
David.
David DeMarselou.
David Rose.
David the Benevolent Malevolence.
Desmond R.
Emily O.
Eric Hunter.
Eugene Butler.
Evan Ritchie.
Felix Meyer.
Femininja.
Findley Bewick-Copley.
Fruit.
Gabrielle DeBelfield-Geraguria.
Gary Marshall.
George Alder.
Graf and Blackpaw.
Haruspicus S.A.
Hero Rewar.
Jack Harvey.
Jakucha Boris.
Jan Anders.
Jason Walter.
Jay Logan.
Jeffrey Theobald.
Jenny Angel.
Jerry Terry.
John Cantwell.
Jordan Tullis.
Joseph Greco.
Julius Nyborg-Olesen.
K. Plays Dota.
Kavxyl.
Kav P.
Kevin M. Kanipi.
Lady Naga.
Luke Gould.
MK.
Mackenzie Cockerill.
Malarkey Bingo.
Marco Shard.
Mike Das Man.
Mike Stanley.
Mr. Clonam.
Mr. Xenophobe.
Mons Silverplatz-Thunstrom.
Neverminder.
Olivia Mello.
Owen Piper.
Philip Huber.
Poggington Jones.
Prochor.
Rebecca Washam.
Recovering Zombie.
Renee Larschaug.
Ricard Hevosmar.
Ritchie Mainville.
Robert Phillips.
Ryan Klaus.
Samael.
Sammy J.
Scartharach's Lord of the Roaches.
Scott Gertin.
Sean Kemp.
Siegfried Pinzer.
Silas Pumpkins.
Spilled Coffee.
Stephanie Aldrich.
Thad Wazalewski.
Thomas Kistner.
Toastinator.
Tom Martell.
Young Cowrie.
Zachariah Scott.
Zachary Clark.
Lissy Roberts.
Ludwig Fendert.
Parker Anderson.
And unknown underscore email.
Yes, that's the name they put in there.
I didn't make a mistake here.
That would be a really silly mistake to make, though.
In case those of you were wondering,
I only do these long credits on pretty long videos
or when I only do a couple videos a month.
I usually intend to do two or three
and then split the credits out across them,
but I haven't got around to that lately
because I've always been super busy trying to make long stuff.
So there's that.
But basically, thanks a lot.
It's fantastic.
♪♪
