Hello, everyone.
Coming at you live from over an hour of technical difficulty to at least one round of our Lemon
Drop Martini.
So we shook this up before we started filming, and then the battery died, so we had to drink
it.
So we're already around in.
So these are Lemon Drop Martinis, inspired by Fifty Shades Darker, because today we're
talking about sequels, while we are trying so desperately to get away from the Fifty
Shades thing.
You know, we can only do so much.
So, about those show names.
Yeah, names are hard.
Titling things are hard, and I don't quite know if maybe it wasn't clear last week.
It just also moved away, because we initially thought it was going to be more along the
lines of a Fifty Shades parody, and it did not turn out to be that, yeah.
So yeah, I think we need to move away.
We're trying to move away from being Fifty Shades of Grey, knockoff number nine billion-y-seventy-something.
So Fifty Shades of Anything is no.
No shades.
No, none.
None.
No more shades.
No more throwing it.
No more having it.
No fifty-fifty-nothing.
No more lowering them.
While we had hoped that we would have our new name, and you know, champion hero of the
people, he praises upon, we did not find Nate that we particularly liked enough to commit
to, but there were some people that were going in a direction that we liked.
My personal favorite of all the suggestions was Pulp Affliction by LJMysticOwl.
That had the catchiness I think we would really like to have, while also having a pun.
Yeah.
Greg McDaniel also suggested Drink Read Photogon, which we thought was funny, but it was a failure
on both counts.
A, we don't want to refer to a popular thing.
B, we don't want to refer to Lovecraft, because we do more than these things.
Someone suggested something on the vein of Libations, Litbations, which sounds a little
too much like clit master-shit.
But yeah, some of these were going in the right direction, but nothing we liked enough
to commit to, so.
We do like puns, but I find in my experience that we're good at spontaneous puns, and terrible
at actually coming up with them when we want them.
And terrible at titles, in all regards.
And the person who ends up giving us our title will be heaped with prize.
Oh yes.
Of some sort.
That is, it's a surprise prize, whoever gives us our name.
So give us our name, and if we like it, and we pick it, you'll get a prize that is a surprise.
Prize, of course, entirely dependent on how much we like it.
Yeah, like if it's the best thing ever, then we'll give you the dog.
So.
Alright.
So before we start- Motherfucker.
So while the name suggestions came up a little bit short, the book suggestions were fantastic.
So many choices.
So we had a lot of choices.
Of the ones that we had not read, Miss Peregrine's Home for Peculiar Children was a popular one.
Yeah, that was a popular one.
And one I've been wanting to read for a while, so I was very much gunning for that one.
We also got a lot of the more popular YA's, the Matched series, the Gone series, which
hmm.
We decided based on popularity and frequency of being mentioned to go with Cinder by Marissa
Meyer.
So we have not read it yet, but we will have read it within two weeks.
So let's give a quick rundown from the blurb in the back.
This is a library copy, as you can tell by how loved and worn it is, so support your
local library.
Even in the future, the story begins with once upon a time.
Humans and androids, Crow-Creen's library, jing.
A deadly plague ravages the puh- barcode, ner people watch.
Waiting to make the 0-2-2-8-5-6-5-9-2-8-7-9-0, it's fate hinges on one girl, the 16 year
old Cinder.
So like we said.
The gifting mechanic is a cyborg.
She's a cyborg.
Support your local library.
I kind of avoided this one for a while because it's another goddamn Cinderella retelling,
but I feel like I know enough people that really liked it, and also it's got like cyborgs
and aliens and shit, which I really like.
So who doesn't love cyborgs and aliens?
Yeah, so we'll read this and see if the originality of the premise overcomes the hackneyedness
of another goddamn Cinderella retelling.
We will be reading this in a two weeks time.
And in two weeks, when we do our next episode, because Nella's out of town this weekend,
you are welcome to read it with us, and then you can share your opinions in the comments
of next week's episode.
But this week's episode, like I said, we're celebrating sequels with our, you know, Fifty
Shades of Grey drink, number two, because of technical difficulties.
Let's talk about book two of the Awoken saga, Arisen.
The only one that came close to being good enough to supplant Arisen, to me, was Forsaken.
But I mean, I'm kind of on the fence on that one, I still kind of like the alliteration
idea.
I know.
Although I have to say, like, I really did enjoy the suggestion of Token.
Token!
The third one should be alliteration.
So Awoken, Arisen, Alliteration.
If we do end up going with the Eat, Pray, Love, which I'm still, you know, I think we're
probably going to have to read Eat, Pray, Love at some point, which neither of us have,
so it kind of falls into our, we probably should.
As we got a lot of comments about the nature of parody, especially as our first one is
focused mainly on paranormal romance and the YA tradition, so we got a lot of people saying
that we should do dystopia, since that is more the thing now, which it absolutely is,
at least in terms of things that are being turned into movies.
In publishing world, dystopia is way dead, but in Hollywood world, it's just getting
started.
I don't know, Nella, how do you feel about involving dystopic elements in our series
that we've already started?
There is definitely an element we can play with about the ending of one world and the
horrors of the new.
Maybe Cthulhu's home dimension is dystopic.
Or something.
Or something.
While we did start with the intent of being, you know, just a parody, I'm not terribly
interested in making this the hungover games.
Here's a question, Lindsay.
What is it about YA dystopia that makes you hesitant about parodying it?
Well, let me tell you my feelings on YA dystopia, Nella.
What are some seminal modern dystopias?
The two most remembered dystopias of the modern era since, you know, the beginning of the
1900s, 1984 and Brave New World.
Were these those?
Cheers.
Let's have a deep discussion about literary history.
The thing about Brave New World in 1984 is, before anything, like Animal Farm, for instance,
they are social critiques.
1984 is a more obvious anxiety.
It expresses a fear of totalitarian government being watched.
Brave New World is more about a society being controlled by comforts and drugs and being
basically desensitized, which effectively robs them of their humanity.
And also, yeah, robbing people of their desire to change their circumstances, like with the
conditioning at the beginning of a child's life.
When we compare that to the modern young adult dystopia, the thing about young adult is it
tends to be very focused on the individual, which makes sense because young adult is ultimately
about coming of age.
When you look at The Hunger Games, which I like a lot, I really like The Hunger Games,
there are absolutely elements of the social anxiety there, particularly in regard to reality
shows and people's lives as entertainment for the masses.
But there's a lot of other things there too.
There's income inequality, and it absolutely has that element of the personal, which I
think is why it's so blockbuster successful.
Then you have the billion-y-jillion other fucking YA dystopias, which are effectively
totalitarian government as a metaphor for, don't tell me what to do, mom.
I actually just read Earthseed, the series, by Octavia Butler, and reading it, the thing
that really struck me is I am a person who really does love a dystopian.
I do like exploring how societies we know it might have collapsed, how we're dealing
with it, how we're being oppressed, how we overcome it.
Realizing, and not so much The Hunger Games, but other series and other books, is that
Earthseed is complete, it explores the collapse in a way that the others fail to do, and the
stakes are real in a way that a lot of YA dystopian just doesn't quite grasp.
Well, the thing about YA dystopia, the thing that's kind of driving me mad about it is
not only the fact that there is a figurehead, it's a figurehead that if you conquer it,
then everything's okay.
It's not, it has nothing to do with the fabric of society, which Earthseed explores a lot.
But I think the really interesting thing about Earthseed within the context of this discussion,
there is no difference between that and a young adult novel, because the protagonist,
especially in the first book, Parable of the Sower.
Read it.
Read it now.
Today.
Before you read this.
I promise.
No, seriously.
I don't care how good this is.
Parable of the Sower is better.
It features basically a protagonist from, I think she's 15 through 19 throughout the
novel.
It's a young adult novel, but it's, Earthseed is a great modern dystopia, but it's not playing
to what publishers or writers, as it were, think are the anxieties and concerns of teenagers,
which is totalitarian government is a metaphor for you can't tell me what to do, mom.
I'm an adult.
Also, it's decidedly non-sexy, because there's no, you know, triangle.
Yeah.
Well, there's no triangle, and the only love interest is, like, 50.
Yeah.
It's a little creepy, but hey, you know, end of the world.
What ifs.
What ifs.
Dystopia is an interesting conversation, and by all means, please, converse in the comments,
and we may discuss dystopia in another episode, because that is absolutely relevant, not only
to young adult, but to science fiction in general.
I don't know.
I feel like it's been a shift in science fiction.
In the past, it's been more about what we've built towards, and now it's about how we have
destroyed ourselves, and what can we do to reclaim what we have lost?
Which totally makes sense, considering the...
The North Atlantic Current.
After our lengthy dystopian conversation, if Arisen is not a dystopia, what is it?
As we mentioned in last week's episode, we have an idea as to what it is, but we, before
we start actually talking mechanics of plot and setting and characters and all that fun
stuff, we want to hear what you have to say without it being a Hunger Games parody.
Please no.
Close it.
So now as we are coming to the close of our second martini and second episode of the new
season, please goddammit give us better names that don't have anything to do with Fifty
Shades of Grey.
As we...
We like puns.
Puns and things that have to do with drinking and reading.
Proofreading, you might say, except for that's the name of a tumbler.
And it's a wonderful tumbler.
You should follow it.
Yeah, proofreading books, it's cute, but we don't want to plagiarize.
So about that Goodreads.
Oh yeah, it is set up.
We now have a Goodreads account under Shay Apocalypse.
First name Shay, last name Apocalypse.
That's how it made me do it.
So you friend us on Goodreads, we'll friend you back and we'll start building our reading
wall.
Yeah.
Our reading wall will be young adults and adult science fiction and fantasy.
And maybe some e-prelubs and cloud atlases and other things that we find relevant and
interesting.
I still need to read that.
Yeah, you do, but you won't have time.
Please leave your comments on our website, ShayApocalypse.com, tweet at us, at ShayApocalypse,
and talk to us in the normal Twitter places.
And also give us drink recipes, because this one, I had to find, it was too strong.
Here's to books and fewer technical difficulties.
And that way we might be a little more coherent.
To feener...
