Hello, everyone. Today, we're going to be talking about The Bell Curve.
The Bell Curve is a 1994 book by psychologist Richard J. Herrnstein and political scientist Charles Murray,
and by way of an introduction here, I'll read the description of the book that's on the back of my copy.
Breaking new ground and old taboos, Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray tell the story of a society in transformation.
At the top, a cognitive elite is forming in which the past key to the best schools and the best jobs is no longer social background,
but high intelligence.
At the bottom, the common denominator of the underclass is increasingly low intelligence rather than racial or social disadvantage.
The Bell Curve describes the state of scientific knowledge about questions that have been on people's minds for years,
but have been considered too sensitive to talk about openly.
Among them, IQ's relationship to crime, unemployment, welfare, child neglect, poverty, and illegitimacy,
ethnic differences in intelligence, trends in fertility among women with different levels of intelligence,
and what policy can do and cannot do to compensate for differences in intelligence.
Brilliantly argued and meticulously documented, The Bell Curve is the essential first step in coming to grips with the nation's social problems.
Even though it is now 25 years old, The Bell Curve's ideas have had quite the lasting impact.
Richard Herrnstein passed away shortly before The Bell Curve was released,
but the other author, Charles Murray, has in recent years, among other things, been on an episode of Making Sense with Sam Harris.
He's been interviewed on Stefan Molyneux's YouTube channel,
had his ideas discussed on the Joe Rogan podcast,
and regular viewers of my channel will remember The Bell Curve being cited in a recent Steven Crowder video.
At the time of the book's release, the backlash against it in certain sections of the media and scientific community was furious.
Dozens of articles were written by scientists and journalists attacking the book,
studies were conducted to debunk its claims, whole books were written to debunk its claims, actually,
and these criticisms were often phrased very harshly.
Columnist Bob Herbert, writing for the New York Times, described the book as
as a scabrous piece of racial pornography masquerading as serious scholarship.
Mr. Murray can protest all he wants, wrote Herbert.
His book is just a genteel way of calling someone the N-word.
This controversy ignited by The Bell Curve has also had quite the lasting impact.
When Charles Murray is invited to speak at college campuses, for instance,
people turn out in protest, often with angry cries of racist, eugenicist, and so on.
And from the enraged reaction to The Bell Curve, a new reader might expect the book to be blatant and unapologetic racist propaganda.
A neo-Nazi screed arguing for the supremacy of the high IQ white race and such things as that.
However, when we actually sit down and read the book, things aren't quite that simple.
Consider the following quotes.
If tomorrow you knew beyond a shadow of a doubt that all the cognitive differences between races were 100% genetic in origin,
nothing of any significance should change.
The knowledge would give you no reason to treat individuals differently than if ethnic differences were 100% environmental.
In any case, you are not going to learn tomorrow that all cognitive differences between races are 100% genetic in origin
because the scientific state of knowledge, unfinished as it is, already gives sample evidence that environment is part of the story.
If the reader is now convinced that either the genetic or environmental explanation has won out to the exclusion of the other,
we have not done a sufficiently good job of presenting one side or the other.
It seems highly likely to us that both genes and the environment have something to do with racial differences.
What might the mix be?
We are resolutely agnostic on that issue.
As far as we can determine, the evidence does not justify an estimate.
For virtually all the topics we will be discussing, cognitive ability accounts for only small to middling proportions of the variation among people.
It almost always explains less than 20% of the variance, to use the statistician's term, usually less than 10% and often less than 5%.
What this means in English is that you cannot predict what a given person will do from his IQ score.
So what's going on here?
It seems, from these quotes anyway, that the bell curve is actually a fairly reasonable piece of work.
These are all relatively mild, middle-of-the-road statements here, so this hardly seems like a scabrous piece of racial pornography so far.
Charles Murray has used quotes from the bell curve, such as we have just read, to defend himself and his work against accusations of racism.
Murray and other defenders of the bell curve cast the attacks on the book as resulting from a cowardly reluctance to discuss what they see as difficult scientific truths.
In particular, a reluctance to discuss possible differences in intelligence across designated racial groups.
So this is what we're gonna talk about today.
We're gonna take a look at some of the arguments in the bell curve, discuss some of the most common counterarguments, and see if we can figure out what all the fuss is about.
Did the bell curve deserve its harsh criticism, or is it the case that its critics simply cannot handle the truth?
Before we get to all that, though, as you can see, this video is rather long.
I expect people may have to watch this one in multiple parts, so firstly here, let's just take a second to lay out the format of the video today.
First off, we're gonna briefly talk about intelligence and intelligence testing,
and quickly mention a few concepts that are gonna be important going forward, such as Spearman's G and Factor Analysis.
Then we're gonna introduce the bell curve and summarize the arguments of each of its four main sections as fairly as we can.
After that, we'll move on to counterarguments in sections primarily concerned with the concept of a general intelligence,
the possible problems with IQ testing, the bell curve's calculation of IQ versus environmental factors,
and finally, the political arguments and policy proposals found within the book.
I will include time codes to all of these sections below so you can drop out and come back as needed.
Right then, let's get started.
And if we're going to be reading a book that is about intelligence, we should start off by briefly talking about exactly what that is.
Let's imagine that we want to design an intelligence test from scratch.
And to do this, we first have to answer two difficult questions.
The first is, how exactly do we define intelligence?
And this is a particularly tricky thing to do, as we'll see.
Let's start with the dictionary definition of intelligence, which is as good a place to start as any, I suppose.
And this is from the Oxford English Dictionary.
Intelligence is the ability to acquire and apply knowledge and skills.
Now, our first problem here is that this definition is rather broad.
Think about all the activities and groups of activities that could fall under this definition of intelligence.
Is one's ability to solve complicated mathematical sums governed by intelligence?
How about the ability to solve a difficult chess puzzle?
I'd imagine we'd say those things are associated with intelligence, right?
Well, how about the ability to write a great novel or compose a great piece of music?
Are those things influenced by intelligence, or would we merely call that creativity?
Is knowing whether to pass or shoot in a game of basketball or football influenced by intelligence, or would we merely call that talent?
Or are all of these things some mix of intelligence, talent, and creativity?
We can certainly imagine a novel that is written intelligently, for instance.
Could we say this is some sort of creative intelligence, or are intelligence and creativity strictly two entirely different concepts?
Is there a difference between memorizing and applying a mathematical function, say,
and memorizing and carrying out a piano piece or a dance routine or a set of football plays?
If there is a difference, what is it?
By what metric are we declaring some of those things to be governed by intelligence and others not?
Are there such things as social and emotional intelligence?
What we might call the ability to read a room, to be aware of the emotions of others,
and to react appropriately in interactions with them.
Is intelligence involved there, or should we just call that something like being sociable?
All the various things I just mentioned can be argued to fall under the umbrella of acquiring and applying knowledge and skills, right?
Defining exactly what intelligence is is a very difficult thing to do,
and there is a wide range of opinions among scientists and academics about the best way to go about it.
Following the publication of The Bell Curve and inspired by the harsh criticism it received,
a public statement entitled,
Mainstream Science on Intelligence, was written by Professor Linda Gottfredson and published in the Wall Street Journal.
The statement sets out to outline,
conclusions regarded as mainstream among researchers on intelligence,
in particular on the nature, origins, and practical consequences of individual and group differences in intelligence.
The statement was sent to 131 researchers of whom 52 signed it,
many of whom are themselves cited in The Bell Curve.
Important for us here is that mainstream science on intelligence gives the following definition of intelligence.
Intelligence is a very general mental capability that, among other things, involves the ability to reason, plan, solve problems,
think abstractly, comprehend complex ideas, learn quickly, and learn from experience.
It is not merely book learning, a narrow academic skill, or test taking smarts.
Rather, it reflects a broader and deeper capability for comprehending our surroundings,
catching on, making sense of things, or figuring out what to do.
My favorite part of this definition is, among other things,
because intelligence is apparently all of this and some other stuff too.
My point here is that even among researchers who are cited in The Bell Curve
and would put their name to a defense of its ideas, intelligence is a very broadly defined concept.
And even if we can agree on a definition of intelligence,
the second difficult question we have to answer is this.
How exactly do we measure it?
It's not as simple as testing for some other human abilities.
We can measure how fast someone is by using units of time and distance,
and we can measure how strong someone is by using units of weight.
But what do you use to quantify how smart someone is?
What we need here is an intelligence unit.
We need a way to express someone's intelligence as a number.
Now, most people today will recognize IQ as the most common intelligence unit,
and let's briefly talk a little about how that came to be.
So way back in the old days, if we wanted to determine someone's personality traits and abilities,
we could measure their skull, calculate the volume of their brain,
or simply look at their facial features.
Phrenology, however, has fallen out of favor with scientists of late,
although it should be noted the technology sector is currently in the process of reinventing it.
Now, I won't be going all that deeply into the history of intelligence testing today,
so I'll just start off here by saying that researchers eventually,
for the most part anyway, stopped measuring people's skulls
and started trying to measure what was going on inside them.
The first practical IQ test was invented by French psychologist Alfred Binet in 1905.
This test set out to determine the mental age of school children
and was designed with the purpose of identifying those children
who were underperforming compared to their peers so they could be given extra help.
Such noble beginnings here.
Now, Binet, for his part, stressed that intelligence was affected by environmental factors,
was not expressible as a singular fixed numerical value,
and was not exclusively genetic in origin.
His test was designed to identify those who were struggling in school
and not to rank people into some sort of eugenic hierarchy.
Binet died in 1911 and has since spent the majority of his time spinning in his grave
due to everything else we're going to talk about today.
An American psychologist called Henry H. Goddard
translated Binet's intelligence test into English in 1908
and distributed thousands of copies of the test across the United States.
And in 1916, another American psychologist named Louis Terman,
working for the Stanford Graduate School of Education,
revised the test into what we know today as the Stanford-Binet IQ test.
Both Goddard and Terman also worked together with other psychologists
to create the Army Alpha and Army Beta tests,
which were intelligence tests administered to US military recruits during World War I.
Before we go any further, I'd like to pause for a second
and propose a question about our intelligence tests here.
How do we know that they are actually measuring intelligence?
They're called intelligence tests, sure,
but that doesn't necessarily mean they are actually measuring intelligence, does it?
As we discussed earlier, intelligence is a very broad concept.
How do we know we're not merely measuring a tiny segment of it?
Well, in the early 20th century, English psychologist Charles Spearman
used a statistical technique called factor analysis
to identify what he called the G factor.
Spearman noticed that people's test results across a range of subjects
were positively correlated, and reasoned that this was because
of an underlying general intelligence factor, which he dubbed G.
And this G factor supposedly underlies all mental performance,
so no matter the subject being tested,
they are all influenced by this one general intelligence factor.
And psychometricians claim that IQ tests measure this G factor,
psychometricians being people concerned with psychological measurement there.
Now, G answers both of our difficult questions, if you'd noticed.
Thanks to the G factor, the vast range of potential human intelligence
is no longer a barrier to us testing for it,
because it's supposedly all linked to a single underlying factor
that is able to be measured and expressed as a single numerical value.
It's very handy, isn't it, this general intelligence factor?
Suspiciously handy, one might say,
but we'll talk more about G and Spearman's factor analysis later on.
Now, before we conclude our little history lesson here,
there is something else that must be noted,
and it's that early proponents of IQ testing in America and elsewhere
were not motivated solely by some neutral scientific curiosity.
They were eugenicists.
They wanted to use what they could learn from intelligence testing
as a way to improve the genetic quality of the human population
through what amounts to selective breeding.
Henry Goddard, who translated Binet's intelligence test,
proposed segregating the so-called feeble-minded into colonies
separate from the rest of society.
And Lewis Turman, author of the Stanford-Binet test,
wrote the following in a 1916 work called The Uses of Intelligence Tests.
Thus far, intelligence tests have found their chief application
in the identification and grading of the feeble-minded.
It is safe to predict that in the near future,
intelligence tests will bring tens of thousands of these high-grade defectives
under the surveillance of society.
This will ultimately result in curtailing the reproduction of feeble-mindedness
and in the elimination of an enormous amount of crime,
pauperism, and industrial inefficiency, end quote.
And tens of thousands of Americans were forcibly sterilized during the last century,
and low IQ test results were used to justify many of those sterilizations.
The eugenics movement lost a lot of momentum as a result of the Second World War,
during which eugenics became irrevocably associated
with many of the worst crimes of Nazi Germany.
And in the following decades,
many countries distanced themselves from eugenics policies,
and many scientists became more suspicious of not just eugenics itself,
but also the extent of the worth of intelligence testing as a concept.
Now, not to spoil the end of my video here,
but this is a good chunk of the reason that the reaction to the bell curve was so harsh.
The idea that we can use intelligence test results
in order to inform political policy was only half a lifetime before the book was written,
getting people sent to gas chambers.
So it's not surprising that people would be rather suspicious about it.
Let's just say that anyone attempting to resurrect this idea
needs to be incredibly aware of and respectful of
exactly where what they're proposing can lead.
So people are fleeing eugenics in droves
simply because it was used to justify an indefensible crime against humanity,
and scientists are increasingly skeptical of the extent of the usefulness of intelligence testing
and IQ and efforts to rank people according to biology in general.
And all this brings us to the bell curve.
The empire strikes back.
And in this book,
Herrnstein and Murray come to the defense of IQ and say now,
everyone calm down.
Don't throw the baby out with the bath water here.
Intelligence testing and IQ are important and useful concepts,
and crucially, what we can learn from IQ testing should inform our politics
and be used to change our society.
So, you know, eugenics, but nice this time.
And since we've now arrived at the bell curve, I think it's time for us to read it.
Not all of it, right now, we'd be here all day,
but I will briefly summarize it here,
for the most part using the introductions that precede each chapter.
In the introduction to the book,
Herrnstein and Murray begin by talking about intelligence.
They offer Spearman's definition of intelligence as
a person's capacity for complex mental work,
and argue that general intelligence can be measured by IQ tests,
saying,
Furthermore, the classicists point out,
the best standardized tests, such as a modern IQ test,
do a reasonably good job of measuring IQ.
When properly administered, the tests are not measurably biased
against socioeconomic, ethnic, or racial subgroups.
They predict a wide variety of socially important outcomes.
They also defend the practice of IQ testing
from critics within the scientific community,
notably evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould,
whose 1981 book, The Mismeasure of Man, was,
quoting the back of my copy here,
immediately hailed as a masterwork,
the ringing answer to those who would classify people,
rank them according to their supposed genetic gifts and limits.
In this book, Gould is highly critical of everything from
phrenology and craniometry to modern IQ testing.
He argues against the concept of a single general intelligence,
and he highlights cases where eugenicists and psychometricians
had relied upon bad data and flawed statistical techniques,
including the case of Cyril Berth,
an early proponent of the use of twin studies
for examining the heritability of intelligence,
who, after he died, was revealed to have just been making up his research data.
That's one way to do it, I suppose.
The bell curve was written with the Mismeasure of Man in mind,
and is in some ways a response to its claims.
A newer edition of the Mismeasure of Man was printed
with an extra chapter responding to the claims of the bell curve,
and a newer edition of the bell curve was printed
with an extra chapter responding in part to Stephen Jay Gould.
Gould and Murray probably should have just met up and had a fight at this point.
On pages 22 and 23,
Hans-Nina Murray summarized their main claims about intelligence,
which are the following.
One, there is such a thing as a general factor of cognitive ability
on which human beings differ.
Two, all standardized tests of academic aptitude or achievement
measure this general factor to some degree,
but IQ tests expressly designed for that purpose measure it most accurately.
Three, IQ scores match, to a first degree,
whatever it is that people mean when they use the word
intelligent or smart in ordinary language.
Four, IQ scores are stable,
although not perfectly so over much of a person's life.
Five, properly administered IQ tests are not demonstrably biased
against social, economic, ethnic, or racial groups.
And six, cognitive ability is substantially heritable,
apparently no less than 40% and no more than 80%.
And on that last point,
Hans-Nina Murray later writes in a section titled
How Much Is IQ a Matter of Genes?
For purposes of this discussion,
we will adopt a middling estimate of 60% heritability,
which by extension means that IQ is about 40% a matter of environment.
So, on to part one of the bell curve,
which is titled The Emergence of a Cognitive Elite,
and introduces Hans-Nina Murray's theory
of the cognitive partitioning of society.
Since World War II, they argue,
colleges in the United States have increasingly admitted people by test score
rather than things like social standing or familial connections.
Where you could once expect to attend a prestigious college
if your father had gone there, for instance,
increasingly you now need to have competitive test scores.
This has led to high IQ people being found disproportionately
in the top institutions and geographically close together.
The job market is also increasingly IQ focused,
as low IQ jobs are replaced by automation,
and the best jobs have apparently become more selective of high IQ candidates.
IQ is also apparently a very good predictor of job performance.
These high IQ people,
economically and geographically segregated from the rest of society,
are increasingly partnering with each other,
and since we're assuming IQ is largely genetic,
are producing high IQ offspring.
Society is thus stratifying itself into some sort of intelligence-based caste system.
At the end of part one,
Hans-Nina Murray summarized their claims by saying,
One, the cognitive elite is getting richer in an era
when everyone else is having to struggle to stay even.
Two, the cognitive elite is increasingly segregated physically from everyone else
in both the workplace and the neighborhood.
And three, the cognitive elite is increasingly likely to intermarry.
Part two of the bell curve is titled
Cognitive Classes and Social Behavior,
and here, Hans-Nina Murray make the case that
intelligence is tied to behavior and predictably determines various things,
such as the likelihood of being poor, a criminal, a high school dropout,
unemployed, an unwed mother, on welfare, and so on.
In order to argue this,
Hans-Nina Murray first introduced the source of their data,
which is the Armed Forces Qualifying Test, or AFQT.
This test was taken as part of the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth.
The subjects of this survey were aged 14 to 22,
and were administered the Armed Forces Qualifying Test in 1980.
Researchers then interviewed the group over the following decade,
asking them various questions about themselves.
Hans-Nina Murray used the respondents' scores on the AFQT
to determine the IQ of each person,
and then used their later interview answers to calculate to what degree
a high IQ is correlated with positive life outcomes,
and to what degree a low IQ is correlated with negative outcomes.
Throughout the rest of this section of the bell curve,
Hans-Nina Murray go further than simply arguing
for the correlation between low IQ and those negative life outcomes.
They make the case that one's AFQT score correlates with them more strongly
than socioeconomic status does.
Hans-Nina Murray compare the AFQT scores of each respondent
against their calculation of the socioeconomic status of the respondent's parents.
So, as the book Inequality by Design puts it,
roughly in the bell curve statistical comparisons,
the parent's class represents nurture, and the AFQT score represents nature.
Looking at various negative life outcomes,
like being in poverty, being in jail, being unemployed, and so on,
Hans-Nina Murray repeatedly find that for the young respondents to the survey,
AFQT score and by proxy IQ score is a more accurate predictor of life outcomes
than a parent's socioeconomic status.
Hans-Nina Murray conclude this section by stating that
a smarter population is more likely to be
and more capable of being made into a civil citizenry.
Part three of the bell curve is titled The National Context
and is where things start getting especially controversial.
This is the section of the book where they discuss differences
in cognitive ability across designated racial groups.
They review published literature on differences in racial IQ scores
and find substantial differences between the various groups.
They discuss the ways in which tests can be biased,
culturally and otherwise, but ultimately conclude
that these group differences cannot be explained away by bias.
In chapter 15, Hans-Nina Murray talk about how they think
cognitive ability in the West is declining, stating,
Throughout the West, modernization has brought falling birth rates.
The rates fall faster for educated women than the uneducated.
Because education is so closely linked with cognitive ability,
this tends to produce a dysgenic effect
or a downward shift in the ability distribution.
Furthermore, education leads women to have their babies later,
which alone also produces additional dysgenic pressure.
Have you ever seen the movie Idiocracy?
Because this is just that, basically.
Lower IQ people have more children than higher IQ people,
so therefore average IQ scores are going down.
However, Hans-Nina Murray run into a problem here,
which is that IQ scores had been going up, not down,
in the decades prior to the publication of the bell curve.
This is known as the Flynn Effect,
named for intelligence researcher James R. Flynn, who documented it,
and we will talk more about the bell curve's attempt
to account for the Flynn Effect later on.
Part four of the bell curve is titled
Living Together and is Concerned with Social Policy.
This is where Hans-Nina Murray start proposing political solutions
to the various problems they outlined in the previous chapters.
They discuss, and ultimately brand as ineffective,
all contemporary attempts to help disadvantaged children succeed in life.
Things like better nutrition, better schooling, a better home environment,
all these things can possibly, temporarily make people smarter, to a degree.
But in the end, Hans-Nina Murray conclude that they will all eventually
run into a genetic limit that cannot be worked around.
Far more money is spent in ineffective attempts to help the disadvantaged
than is spent on the gifted, Hans-Nina Murray contend,
and we should thus directly shift the resources upwards
to support our best and brightest.
And this quote is from the introduction to Chapter 18.
Some federal funds now so exclusively focused on the disadvantaged
should be reallocated to programs for the gifted.
Affirmative action in schools, as it stands, should be scrapped, of course.
Hans-Nina Murray argue for a sort of race-blind, score-based affirmative action.
They still support colleges accepting applicants from disadvantaged backgrounds,
but only if they have comparable test scores to the other applicants.
Affirmative action in the job market should also be scrapped,
with Hans-Nina Murray arguing that in pursuit of equality,
we have actually already overshot it,
and that black people actually attain better quality jobs than white people,
once you account for their IQs, of course.
Hans-Nina Murray argue for encouraging low IQ parents
to have fewer children in a couple of different ways.
Firstly, they argue for making marriage a prerequisite for parental rights,
and they also support cutting off welfare for low-income mothers,
stating that we urge generally that these policies,
represented by the extensive network of cash and services
for low-income women who have babies, be ended.
They also argue more generally in favor of individualism,
concluding Chapter 21 by writing,
Individualism is not only America's heritage, it must be its future.
Hans-Nina Murray conclude this part of the bell curve with the following.
Inequality of endowments, including intelligence, is a reality.
Trying to pretend that inequality does not really exist has led to disaster.
Trying to eradicate inequality with artificially manufactured outcomes has led to disaster.
It is time for America to once again try living with inequality as life is lived,
understanding that each human being has strengths and weaknesses and so on.
This is the end of the main text of the bell curve.
Then follows seven appendices explaining various things,
about the data and statistical methods used in the book, among other things.
Additionally, newer versions of the bell curve contain an afterword written in response
to various criticisms directed at the book by various scientists and journalists,
and we will be quoting from that at several points later on.
So then, that was the bell curve.
And before we carry on here, I think it would be worthwhile
to attempt to summarize the general argument of the book.
So here is my understanding of it in four points.
One, general intelligence, or G, exists.
General intelligence is to some degree heritable, innate,
unable to be significantly changed and unevenly distributed,
both within and across population groups.
Two, IQ tests measure G fairly and accurately.
Three, one's IQ is more important than one's social background
in determining one's life outcomes.
And four, given what we can learn from these points,
we should implement conservative social policies,
such as limiting welfare, incentivizing marriage,
abandoning affirmative action, and more broadly,
we should promote a return to a more individualistic society.
Now, I'm sure someone could disagree with the conservative adjective
in this last point and argue that Herrnstein and Murray
merely promote whatever policies seem to best address the problems they discuss.
They propose better access to birth control, for instance,
which is not typically a conservative policy.
Overall, though, their policy recommendations
definitely lean heavily to the right.
So it's now time to begin looking at the counter arguments,
and we will begin with point one on this list
and talk about general intelligence.
So if we want to understand general intelligence,
we first need to understand the statistical technique
by which it is calculated, factor analysis.
And if we want to understand factor analysis,
we first need to talk about correlation and causation.
Starting with correlation, then.
Correlation is basically statistical association.
Stephen Jay Gould in The Mismeasure of Man
describes it in the following way.
Correlation assesses the tendency of one measure
to vary in concert with another.
As a child grows, for example, both its arms and legs get longer.
This joint tendency to change in the same direction
is called a positive correlation.
Not all parts of the body display such positive correlation during growth.
Teeth, for example, do not grow after they erupt.
The relationship between first incisor length and leg length
from, say, age 10 to adulthood would represent zero correlation.
Legs would get longer while teeth changed not at all.
Other correlations can be negative.
One measure increases while the other decreases.
We begin to lose neurons at a distressingly early age
and they are not replaced.
Thus, the relationship between leg length and number of neurons
after mid-childhood represents negative correlation.
Leg length increases while number of neurons decreases.
And Gould also includes this handy illustration
of some example correlation graphs here.
Now, of course, leg length and arm length are positively correlated
because they share an underlying cause,
which is simply general biological growth.
However, we can think of plenty of things
that are positively correlated and do not share a cause.
You might be familiar with the following examples
from the page Spurious Correlations, which I will link below.
Per capita cheese consumption correlates with number of people who died
by becoming tangled in their bedsheets.
Number of letters in winning word of Scripps National Spelling Bee
correlates with number of people killed by venomous spiders, and so on.
Obviously, these things have nothing to do with each other.
Probably.
So some correlations are just chance.
It would be an error to assume a shared cause there.
Correlation does not imply causation, is the saying.
Now, in addition to assuming a shared cause when there is not one,
another common mistake here is to ignore a shared cause when there is one.
For example, when considering arm and leg length
to ignore the underlying biological growth
and assume that legs are getting longer because arms are, or vice versa.
There are lots of different ways to misrepresent correlations, basically.
I agree with Gould when he writes the invalid assumption that correlation implies cause
is probably among the two or three most serious and common errors of human reasoning.
Anyway, one result of us calculating the correlation between arm and leg lengths
is that we have simplified the data somewhat.
The strong correlation between the two variables means we can basically express them as one,
so long as we don't mind losing a little information along the way.
But what if instead of just two variables,
we wanted to compare correlations between the size of, say, 50 different body parts?
Plotting two measurements in a graph is fairly easy.
With the addition of a third measurement, though, things start getting a little trickier.
This figure from the Mismeasure of Man, where Gould introduces head measurements into the mix,
needs another dimension in order to convey the information.
And with more variables added in, the data quickly gets too complex
to display with a mere three dimensions.
And this brings us to factor analysis.
Similar to how we simplified arm and leg length to a single dimension,
factor analysis can be used to reduce a complex system of correlated variables
to a smaller number of underlying factors.
And you might find that just a few underlying factors explain the vast majority of the
variations in a larger number of variables.
And furthermore, you could identify which factor explained the majority of the variation.
I won't be going into the exact specifics of how factor analysis works.
I couldn't if I wanted to, to be honest, but this is basically how it is used.
To quote Gould again,
factor analysis is a mathematical technique for reducing a complex system of correlations
into fewer dimensions.
So you might be wondering, what does all this have to do with intelligence?
Well, factor analysis is how psychologist Charles Spearman came up with the concept of the G factor.
Spearman looked at a big mass of data showing that people scores on various intelligence tests
were positively correlated, carried out a little factor analysis,
and identified the most important underlying statistical factor.
He then called this G, or general intelligence.
So this G is the underlying general mental ability that we are supposedly measuring with IQ tests.
However, there are a few problems with this G factor.
One is, as the bell curve itself points out,
that it's based on statistical analysis rather than direct observation.
We are inferring its existence from the data rather than measuring it directly, basically.
It is the result of a particular statistical method.
Secondly, simplifying the majority of the data down to a single factor
can actually obscure a lot of useful information.
What if the data shows that people who do well on tests of numerical ability
tend to do well on other tests of numerical ability,
and people who do well on tests of their language ability
tend to do better on other tests of language ability?
We can imagine two people who are determined to be statistically as smart as each other,
but who excel in completely different areas, right?
And there are several different intelligence theories
identifying different clusters of mental abilities.
Verbal, logical, spatial, mathematical, whatever else.
You can go and read about all of those if you're very bored.
But what can we take away from our little chat about correlation and factor analysis here?
Well, first of all, factor analysis tells us nothing about causation.
It deals with correlations.
It can show that there might be common factors underlying different variables,
but it does not identify for us why those variables vary.
As a comparison here, let's say you take a sample of 10,000 random members of the public
and you test their athletic performance at various physical tests.
Amount of weight lifted, length jumped, speed at running various distances,
sit-ups completed, whatever.
And let's say that what you find is that people who perform well on one test relative to the group
tend to perform well on the other tests relative to the group
and vice versa for those who perform poorly.
Now you could, if you so fancied, subject this data to factor analysis.
Identify numerically the most important underlying factor and name it F
for general fitness or something.
And you could probably further assign each person an FQ or fitness quotient.
However, what you would not have done is explain why some people are fitter than others.
You would have said nothing about the heritability of athletic performance,
the degree to which genetics and environment contribute to athletic performance.
You'd have said nothing about the causes of the data at all.
It would be a leap of logic to assume that each person's FQ is innate and unchangeable.
The data you have cannot tell you any such thing by itself.
You may also find that your singular numerical fitness quotient
obscures a lot of useful information.
For instance, you might find people who are better at strength exercises
tend to be better at other strength exercises and so on.
So the mere existence of a general factor of cognitive ability
would not explain why there are differences between people.
In fact, the G factor is perfectly consistent
with a 100% environmental approach to understanding intelligence.
We could play devil's advocate here and say,
yes, a general factor of intelligence exists and is important,
but the variance in G between people is explained entirely by environmental factors.
Childhood nutrition, socioeconomic status, school quality, and so on.
Absolutely nothing happens in the factor analysis process
to tell us about what the causes are for people having different measurable levels of intelligence.
And even if we accept a single general intelligence factor exists,
that would not necessarily imply a genetic causation.
And speaking of genetics, let's next talk about the word heritability.
When the bell curve says,
cognitive ability is substantially heritable,
apparently no less than 40% and no more than 80%,
what does that mean exactly?
If we average it for 60%, like they do,
are we therefore to assume that each person's individual IQ
is 60% determined by heritable genetics and 40% by the environment?
Well, no.
Heritability is unfortunately one of those awkward words
which has a common use understanding and a scientific understanding
which differ in a few important ways.
The common use understanding is something like
the ability of a thing to be passed down genetically, right?
You can inherit being tall or having red hair,
but you can't inherit a scar or a finger lost in an accident, say.
The technical academic meaning of heritability is rather different.
Heritability is a numerical concept used to estimate
the contribution of genetic variance to overall variance of a trait within a group.
So basically, heritability estimates the degree to which
the variance of a trait within a group is due to genetics.
Height is thus a heritable trait.
Taller parents will generally have taller offspring, for example,
and this is measurable against a population group.
Having two arms, however, is not a heritable trait
because almost everyone has two arms.
And for people who don't have two arms,
that variance is usually environmental in nature.
Having two arms is genetically determined,
but it is not a heritable trait if you follow
because genes account for very little of the variance
within the population group.
Something that is very highly heritable,
we would say has a heritability of one.
Something that is not heritable at all,
we would say has a heritability of zero.
If we say something has a heritability of 0.6,
then what we mean there is that 60% of the variance of the trait
in a population group will be due to genetic factors.
What it does not mean is that 60% of the trait in one individual
is due to their genes and 40% due to the environment.
Heritability tells us about variance within a group,
not the makeup of individuals.
It is a population statistic.
You cannot meaningfully ask what the heritability of your IQ is.
So where am I going with this?
Well, there's a couple of points that I'd like to make.
The first is that a trait can be determined by your genes
and be very lowly heritable, such as the presence of arms,
and also the inverse of that.
A trait could be very highly heritable
and not directly genetically determined.
One common example used to illustrate this is earrings.
What would we say accounts for the variance
in whether people wear earrings within a particular group?
Well, depending on the group,
most of the variance could be due, in one sense,
to a genetic factor, biological sex.
Wearing earrings would therefore be a heritable trait,
but this does not mean that there is an earring gene
that is being passed down generationally.
The majority of people wearing earrings being women
would be due to environmental factors, fashion and gender roles,
which are subject to change over time.
In more recent years, for example,
men in the West have increasingly been wearing earrings.
The heritability of the trait of wearing earrings is thus decreasing,
because less of the variance is being accounted for by genetics.
But crucially here,
nothing is actually happening genetically on the earring front.
The change in heritability is down to changing environmental factors.
When we say something is due to genetics,
we need to be very careful about exactly what we mean.
A useful categorization here is
direct versus indirect genetic determination.
We need to be sure to differentiate between things
that are directly genetically determined,
as in your genes are directly causing some biochemical process
to happen within you,
and things that are indirectly genetically determined,
as a result of your genes interacting with your environment.
Women being more likely to wear earrings, for instance,
is a heritable trait,
but it is not directly genetically determined.
This is relevant to us because IQ could be such a trait,
where differences in IQ across designated racial groups
are caused not by a direct genetic process,
but instead by how our genetically determined characteristics
interact with our environment,
so as to affect our results on IQ tests.
For example,
let's imagine your genes cause you to have a particular skin color,
and you live in a segregated society
in which people with that skin color are discriminated against
and do not have equal access to education.
Now that group's lower results on IQ tests
would be, in one sense, because of their genes.
And scientists studying genetics
might very well find a strong correlation
between particular genes and lowered IQ test results,
but if we don't take the environment into account,
that by itself can't tell us anything.
The point here is that a trait could be very highly heritable
and correlated strongly with particular genes
and still have zero direct genetic determination.
Now the idea that wearing earrings
can be more of a heritable trait than having ears
is admittedly a bit of a difficult concept to grasp at first sight,
and I would understand if it took a little time
for someone to wrap their head around all this.
Right now, though, what I want you to take away from this section,
if nothing else,
is the idea that something being heritable
does not necessarily mean it is actually being directly caused by genetics.
My next point is that heritability estimates the causes of variants
within a group.
It cannot tell us about reasons for differences across groups.
And to illustrate this,
we will paraphrase a thought experiment by geneticist Richard Lewontin.
Let's say we take a packet of seeds
and plant them in fertilized soil in a controlled laboratory environment,
and we ensure that the growing plants have sufficient
and equal amounts of water and light.
And doesn't that sound nice?
Now height in plants is a heritable trait, just like in humans,
and the plants would thus grow to a range of different heights.
Height in this experiment would be very highly heritable,
because the fact we're ensuring the plants have an equal environment
means that the variance in heights in the group
is solely down to genetics.
Next, let's say we do that experiment again,
only this time we plant the seeds in bad soil
and give them less but equal within the group amounts of water and light.
The thing to understand here is that height in this second experiment
would be exactly as heritable as in the previous experiment.
All of the plants from the second group have the same group environment,
meaning that, again, the group variance in heights
would be solely down to genetics.
The poor environment will produce smaller plants,
but since they are all subject to that environment equally,
heritability remains high.
The problems arise when we start trying to compare these two groups.
Let's say the second group of plants has an average height
that is 15% shorter than the first group, for instance.
The heritability of height tells us nothing about why that is.
Heritability was the same across both groups.
If you're trying to figure out why one group of plants grew larger than the other,
saying height is heritable tells us nothing useful.
The difference between the groups was entirely down to environmental factors,
and heritability, despite being high, played no part.
The two points we can take from this thought experiment are,
firstly, the heritability of traits does not account for group differences,
and secondly, a trait having a high heritability
does not mean that trait is immutable or unaffected by the environment.
For another example of this, height in humans is a highly heritable trait,
but the average human height increased substantially over the last century,
and this was due to environmental changes,
such as better health care and nutrition.
Or for another example,
North Koreans are, on average, a few inches shorter than South Koreans,
and this is down to the different material conditions in those two countries,
not some recent radical divergence in genetics.
Height is heritable in both North and South Korea,
but it's the environment that is the cause of the variance between the groups.
This is something that the bell curve crucially misunderstands
when talking about the heritability of intelligence and IQ.
On page 109, they say,
even a heritability of 0.6 leaves room for considerable change
if the changes in environments are commensurably large,
the implication here being that higher heritabilities
would be less affected by changes in the environment,
and this is just not how it works.
IQ could be 100% heritable
and still massively affected by changes in the group environment.
Professor Ned Block from New York University
makes several of these points about heritability
in an article entitled How Heritability Misleads About Race,
and then goes on to say,
I hope these points remove the temptation exhibited in the bell curve
to think of the heritability of IQ as a constant, like the speed of light.
Heritability is a population statistic,
just like birth rate or number of TVs,
and can be expected to change with changing circumstances.
These issues are pathetically misunderstood by Charles Murray.
In a CNN interview reported in the New Republic,
Murray declared,
when I, when we, say 60% heritability,
it's not 60% of the variation,
it is 60% of the IQ in any given person.
Later, he repeated that for the average person,
60% of the intelligence comes from heredity,
and added that this was true of the human species,
missing the point that heritability makes no sense for an individual
and that heritability statistics are population relative.
So if you don't quite understand all this stuff about heritability,
don't feel too bad because Charles Murray doesn't understand it either.
Or at least he didn't 25 years ago,
he may have done his homework since then, who knows.
Looking again at the bell curve's list of claims about intelligence,
the only one on here that could be said to be making a point about genetics is number six.
Cognitive ability is substantially heritable.
However, as we've seen,
a trait being heritable does not necessarily mean a direct genetic cause.
It does not tell us anything about the heritability of a particular individual's intelligence,
and it cannot tell us the reason for differences between groups of people.
Those differences between people could be caused by environmental factors,
because, twist, environments are heritable too.
As the bell curve itself points out,
non-genetic characteristics can nonetheless run in families.
For practical purposes, environments are heritable too.
So to summarize this section,
we have considered the method by which a general intelligence factor is determined,
and also claims about its heritability.
But we can conclude from neither of these things
that the variance in intelligence between groups of people has a direct genetic cause.
The cause could simply be directly due to the environment,
or indirectly by way of how genes are interacting with that environment.
So why am I listing off all the ways in which
Hanstein and Murray do not prove a genetic cause for cognitive ability, you might ask.
Their later comparisons of IQ and environmental factors
assume that IQ is largely genetic in origin,
so presumably they do prove it at some point, right?
Well, to put it bluntly, no.
In their section, How Much Is IQ a Matter of Genes?,
they estimate the heritability of IQ scores by talking about twin studies.
We can use studies of identical twins, non-identical twins, and regular siblings
to estimate the extent of genetic effects upon IQ
by noting the differences in correlations between their scores on intelligence tests.
However, there are a few problems with this.
Most importantly for us here being that in attempting to learn about
genetic cognitive ability via intelligence test scores,
we have to make the assumption that intelligence tests
are an accurate measure of cognitive ability.
But more on that in a moment.
Even if we assume that the tests do give an accurate representation of cognitive ability,
attempts to use these correlations to construct a simple genetic model for IQ
run into several issues.
Firstly, the IQs of identical twins do not perfectly correlate,
as we would expect them to, given their nearly identical genetics.
The correlation of siblings who were raised apart is weaker
than the correlation of siblings who were raised together.
And probably most troublesome for a purely genetic model here
is that there is also some correlation between parents and adopted children.
Their scores correlate to some degree,
despite there being no immediate genetic link beyond being the same species, of course.
So in our search for exactly how much genetics affects cognitive ability,
these observations are only ever going to get us so far.
It's very difficult to disentangle the genetic effects from the environmental ones.
What we really need here is genetics research to advance to the point
where we understand exactly which genes influence intelligence
and to which degree they influence intelligence.
When the bell curve was published, the evidence was not there.
As Herndstein and Murray admit,
the state of knowledge does not permit a precise estimate.
And in 2019, 25 years later, the evidence is still not there.
If anything, with regards to the claims in the bell curve,
particularly its claims about racial differences,
the genetic story has only gotten more complicated.
The reason I say designated racial groups instead of racial groups during this video
is because on a genetic level,
our skin color folk understanding of racial groups can be unhelpful.
There can be greater genetic differences
within our socially constructed racial groups than between them.
I doubt anyone would be so naive as to expect us to one day identify
the singular gene that controls both skin color and intelligence.
Someone having dark skin and thus being identified and identifying as black
could have a whole range of genetic history.
You can't read someone's genes by looking at their skin color.
This is important for us because the authors of the bell curve
use our socially constructed racial groups in their book.
Talking about this, they say,
what does it mean to be black in America in racial terms
when the word black or African-American can be used
for people whose ancestry is more European than African?
How are we to classify a person whose parents hail from Panama
but whose ancestry is predominantly African?
Is he a Latino, a black?
The rule we follow here is to classify people
according to the way they classify themselves.
It would be a leap of logic to assume genetic explanations
for characteristics of self-identified groups,
given that those groups could have a wide range of genetic makeups.
My point with all this is that the bell curve's direct evidence
of a genetic basis for IQ is missing.
Charles Murray's attitude towards this problem
in the years since the publication of the book
has been to kick the can down the road,
assuming that he and Herrnstein were prematurely right,
to borrow a phrase from his afterword to the bell curve,
and that the accumulating genetic evidence will prove him right
if everyone just waits a little longer.
And it remains his tactic more than two decades later.
In October of this year, Professor Ewan Birney,
the director of the European Bioinformatics Institute,
published a blog post titled
Race, Genetics and Pseudoscience, an explainer,
which discusses, among other things,
how our traditional racial categorizations
are not reflected in actual patterns of genetic variation,
how distinct groups within Africa can be as distinct from each other
as they are with non-Africans,
how race is not a useful or accurate term for geneticists,
and it says that it is often suggested that geneticists
who emphasize the biological invalidity of race
are under the form of political correctness,
forced to suppress their real opinions
in order to maintain their positions in the academy.
Such accusations are unfounded
and betray a lack of understanding of what motivates science.
Charles Murray responded to this post on Twitter a few days later,
saying,
I can't understand why people are so eager to go public
with positions for which the weight of the accumulating evidence
is so unwelcome
and that will be definitively settled within a few years.
So it seems the evidence for Murray is still just a few years away.
With regards to the bell curve, however,
it is possible we are being a little unfair
when we criticize it for basing much of its analysis
on relatively crude estimations.
After all, they do admit the evidence is not there,
and they say,
if the reader is now convinced that either the genetic or environmental explanation
has won out to the exclusion of the other,
we have not done a sufficiently good job of presenting one side or the other.
We should not criticize scientists for saying,
the evidence isn't there yet, but here's a rough guess.
Presenting such estimates and attempting to disprove them
is a key part of the scientific process.
Problems arise when we get to part four of the bell curve, however.
While it is fine to say,
the evidence isn't there yet, but here's a rough guess,
it is not so fine to say,
the evidence isn't there yet,
here's a rough guess.
And based upon this rough guess,
you should immediately suspend welfare programs
for underprivileged children.
But we'll talk more about this later
when we discuss the politics of the bell curve.
For now, though, let's address the assumption I mentioned earlier
when talking about twin studies.
We have been in this section
assuming that we can measure native intelligence accurately.
If we cannot measure native intelligence accurately,
then much of what we've talked about thus far is irrelevant.
So it's now time to talk about IQ tests.
So I summarized the bell curve's claims about IQ tests
as IQ tests measure G fairly and accurately.
I wrote fairly because of their statement,
properly administered IQ tests are not demonstrably biased
against social, economic, ethnic, or racial groups.
And I wrote the word accurately because of their statement
that all standardized tests of academic aptitude or achievement
measure this general factor to some degree,
but IQ tests expressly designed for that purpose
measure it most accurately.
So firstly here, we're going to discuss
a few of the possible problems with IQ tests,
starting with the various ways
in which they can deliver biased results.
Now, direct cultural bias in IQ test items
is discussed by Herrnstein and Murray in chapter 13.
They use an example of a question that includes the word regata,
which is a word that might bias the results
towards certain cultural and economic groups.
And certain historical so-called intelligence test questions
have actually been much worse than this.
Some of them amounted to nothing more than general knowledge questions.
The army alpha test used in World War I
asked army recruits to identify
what particular celebrities were famous for,
in which cities certain cars were manufactured,
and the products produced by certain brands.
Questions like these obviously have very little to do
with any native intellectual ability,
they're just testing whether or not
you happen to already know the answer.
There's no opportunity to work it out,
so any psychometricians constructing intelligence tests
certainly need to be careful
to not include biased test items like these ones.
Tests can also be biased for instruction.
And what do we mean by instruction here?
Well, simply whether or not you've been taught
the meaning of a word
or the best method for solving a maths problem
is going to matter a lot on a test
that requires you to draw upon your mathematical
and language abilities.
As an example here,
I'm gonna assume that we all agree
it would be unfair to expect a random teenager
to, by themselves, during a test,
invent trigonometry.
If you include trigonometry questions
on your intelligence test,
what you'll be testing for there
will not solely be the intelligence of the respondent,
but also whether or not they've been taught
trigonometry before,
how recently they were taught it,
and how well they were taught it.
This is relevant for us here
because the Armed Forces Qualifying Test,
which is the primary source of intelligence test data
in the bell curve,
had as one of its four sections
a mathematics test which included questions
examining knowledge of classroom trigonometry and algebra.
This is more of a test of scholastic aptitude
than native intelligence,
and is also testing by proxy
the quality of the teaching at the different schools
that the AFQT respondents went to.
We can't assume that to be equal
across thousands of different people, can we?
This is one of a few problems with the AFQT
that has roots in the fact
that it was not designed as an IQ test,
but more on that in a second.
Another way that IQ tests can be biased is for speed.
Think of the definitions of intelligence
we've seen so far.
A capacity for complex mental work,
catching on, making sense of things,
and figuring out what to do.
And simply because of the way IQ tests
are administered,
we have to add the words
within the time constraints of an academic test
to all of those things.
IQ tests are by their nature
biased towards how fast you can think
and away from other important qualities
which contribute to overall cognitive ability
such as stamina, determination, and discipline.
Similar to that point,
IQ tests have a more general bias
towards familiarity with an academic environment.
People unfamiliar with taking tests
are going to fare worse
than people who are very used to it
simply due to being in an unfamiliar environment.
Things like anxiety and stress
come into play here.
Those can affect intelligence test results
despite having nothing directly
to do with intelligence themselves.
Herrnstein and Murray
are particularly aware of that last point,
and we need to briefly discuss
the Flynn effect here.
So when IQ tests are constructed,
they're standardized using a sample of test takers.
Now what that means in practice
is the testers will test some people,
work out the average score,
and set that to correspond to 100.
This is why we recognize an IQ of 100 as the average.
When those IQ tests are later revised
or when new IQ tests are designed,
they're also standardized on new groups of people
and their average is set again to 100.
However, researchers noticed
that when newer test subjects
take the older versions of a test,
their IQ scores are on average higher.
So IQ scores have gone up over time, basically,
meaning if you believe that IQ tests measure intelligence,
then people must be getting more intelligent, right?
This is troublesome for Herrnstein and Murray
because they argue the opposite,
that cognitive ability is deteriorating.
And this brings us back to our point
about bias towards an academic environment.
Addressing the Flynn effect,
Herrnstein and Murray write the following.
There is a further question to answer.
Does a 15-point IQ difference
between grandparents and their grandchildren
mean that the grandchildren are 15 points smarter?
Some experts do not believe that the rise is holy,
perhaps not even partly a rise in intelligence,
but in the narrower skills
involved in intelligence test-taking per se.
So this, if it were true,
would mean that people are actually getting less intelligent,
but at the same time,
they are getting better at taking IQ tests.
Now, you might say, isn't that a huge contradiction?
Aren't they basically admitting that IQ tests
measure something other than inborn intelligence?
After all, if IQ tests supposedly measure
native cognitive ability accurately,
how could scores be going up
while cognitive ability is going down?
However, to be fair to Herrnstein and Murray,
it would be hasty to dismiss
their dysgenics hypothesis outright.
There is another possibility here,
and it's that people are getting genetically less intelligent,
but the environmental factors affecting intelligence
have undergone such large changes
that their positive effects upon IQ
are more than accounting
for the downward genetic ability shift.
So roughly, we would have lost a genetic IQ point
thanks to dysgenics,
but gained two back thanks to a better environment.
So what evidence does the bell curve produce
in support of this downward trend
in genetic cognitive ability?
Well, unfortunately for Herrnstein and Murray,
their main source of data,
the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth,
is not much use here.
Ideally, what we want to do is give IQ tests
to the children of women who took part in the AFQT,
so we could directly compare child to parent
and see if any downwards shift was happening.
However, this would be a mistake,
as since our data is coming
from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth,
the respondents are, appropriately, young.
People who wait longer to have children
are typically wealthier and better educated,
and thus tend to have children with higher IQs.
Limiting ourselves to looking at only young mothers
will skew the apparent IQ of the next generation downwards,
so it would be an inaccurate thing to do.
Herrnstein and Murray are, thankfully,
well aware of this problem.
Not that it stops them from trying, however.
Herrnstein and Murray's dysgenics hypothesis
is discussed in Intelligence, Genes, and Success,
Scientists Respond to the Bell Curve,
a 1997 book which responds to many of the points
made in the Bell Curve.
The authors of that book, for their part,
find no direct empirical evidence,
either for or against a dysgenic effect
acting upon cognitive ability,
stating that, insofar as we are aware,
there is nothing but anecdotal evidence for dysgenics.
Anyway, let's get back on track.
Now, to illustrate another way IQ tests can be biased,
I think it would be a good exercise for us all
to briefly take a very simple one-question test together.
So get your pencil and paper ready, folks.
Here it is.
Easy, right?
An incredibly simple number sequence question there,
the sort you'd expect nearly anyone to be able to work out.
It's also a fair and unbiased question, of course.
I mean, everyone was given the exact same question
and the exact same amount of time to answer it, right?
What could be more fair and unbiased than that?
Now, of course, this question is not fair.
It is biased in favor of Japanese people.
And anime fans, I guess.
The point here is that this question would,
in any language, be biased against people
who don't speak that language.
A question in English is biased against people
who don't speak English, isn't it?
Now you might protest.
This seems like a very obvious point.
I mean, surely nobody is gonna give an IQ test in English
to a group of people who are not fluent in English
and then try to pass off those results as legitimate, right?
Well, stay tuned, folks.
One point not given due consideration by the bell curve
during their discussion of testing bias
is that even a completely unbiased test,
were it possible to construct such a thing,
would still deliver biased results
if it were being carried out in a biased system.
When Herrnstein and Murray say properly administered IQ tests
are not demonstrably biased,
they seemingly mean that the tests themselves
do not contain words like regatta,
not that the tests necessarily deliver fair results.
So that is another potential problem with IQ tests to watch out for.
Even if we eliminate as much cultural bias as possible from the test,
we could still, thanks to the wider environment
the tests are taking place in, be receiving biased results.
For instance, if you carried out an IQ test
in a racially segregated white supremacist state,
that environment is obviously gonna affect the average IQ scores
of different designated racial groups.
Now you might protest.
This also seems like a very obvious point.
I mean, surely nobody's gonna carry out an IQ test
in a racially segregated white supremacist state
and then try to pass off those results as legitimate, right?
Again, stay tuned, folks.
Now keeping in mind all the various possible problems
with IQ testing that we've just discussed,
let's take a look at a few of the IQ tests
that Herrnstein and Murray cite as evidence for claims in the bell curve.
Surely they will be properly administered, right?
After all, Herrnstein and Murray themselves
discuss many of the same issues that we just have.
It would follow that given their familiarity
with these potential problems,
they would of course endeavor to avoid them.
So let's see how they do on that front.
We'll take a look at a particular section of the bell curve now,
see what the claims are,
and then have a bit of a dig into the sources backing up those claims.
And this is from a section titled
How do African Americans compare with blacks in Africa on cognitive tests?
And I quote,
This question often arises in the context of black-white comparisons in America,
the thought being that the African black population
has not been subjected to the historical legacy
of American black slavery and discrimination
and might therefore have higher scores.
Richard Lynn was able to assemble 11 studies
in his 1991 review of the literature.
He estimated the median black African IQ to be 75,
approximately 1.7 standard deviations below the US overall population average,
about 10 points lower than the current figure for American blacks.
In summary, African blacks are, on average,
substantially below African Americans in intelligence test scores.
Psychometrically, there is little reason to think that these results
mean anything different about cognitive functioning
than they mean in non-African populations.
For our purposes, the main point is that the hypothesis
about the special circumstances of American blacks depressing their test scores
is not substantiated by the African data.
So this is Herrnstein and Murray's answer
to those who point to the legacy of slavery and discrimination in the United States
as an explanation for the differences in IQ scores
between its black and white populations.
They point to black people in Africa and say,
hey, well, they also got lower scores.
Black African people haven't been subject to discrimination in America after all,
so doesn't this prove that discrimination in America
can't be depressing black IQ scores?
Well, not really.
Herrnstein and Murray's decision to limit their concern here
to American black slavery and discrimination is a huge oversight
because there could also be discrimination in whichever parts of Africa
they are talking about, if you follow.
That could be, in a similar way, depressing the scores there, too.
If that were the case, attempting to use the African data
as some sort of control test for the American data
would be fairly ridiculous, to say the least.
America does not have a monopoly on discrimination and depression, does it?
And so we need to ask, which parts of Africa are they talking about?
They say that Richard Lin was able to assemble 11 studies
in his 1991 review of the literature.
Now, Herrnstein and Murray claiming the acknowledgments
at the start of the bell curve to have benefited
especially from the advice of this Richard Lin,
who they elsewhere call a leading scholar of racial and ethnic differences,
and they cite his work several times throughout the book.
So let's take a look at Richard Lin's 1991 review of the literature,
entitled, Race Differences in Intelligence, A Global Perspective,
which was published in Mankind Quarterly,
and remember the name of that journal, folks,
as we'll be talking more about that later on.
So the first thing we'll notice about this review
is that it unfortunately designates people as either
caucasoids, mongoloids, or negroids,
including, quote, hybrids of those groups,
for instance, caucasoid, negroid, hybrids, and so on.
I can only apologize for having to read out this rubbish.
So let's look at the 11 studies included in this review
and see which areas of Africa we are concerned with.
Well, there's one from what was then known as the Belgian Congo,
one from Ghana, two from Nigeria, one from Uganda,
one from Zambia, and five from South Africa.
And there is rather a lot to comment on here,
but how about we start with sample sizes?
Some of them are rather small, you may have noticed.
87 people for Nigeria, 50 people for Uganda, and so on.
By far the most represented area here is South Africa.
The number of people tested in South Africa
was more than double the number of all the other subjects combined.
And what's the significance of this?
Well, this review was published in 1991.
South African apartheid ended in 1994.
Now, I don't want to get too deep into this right now,
but for those who don't know,
apartheid was an explicitly white supremacist system
of enforced racial segregation.
Non-white South Africans were openly discriminated against,
forced from their homes, forbidden to live in certain areas
and hold certain jobs, and most importantly for us here,
had to attend segregated schools,
which were massively underfunded compared to the schools
that the white South Africans went to,
many being without electricity or even running water.
And just so we know the sort of education system we're dealing with here,
I'll quickly quote some relevant passages from South Africa,
a country study from the Library of Congress.
The Bantu Education Act of 1953
widened the gaps in educational opportunities
for different racial groups.
Two of the architects of Bantu education,
Dr. W.M. Iselin and Dr. Hendrik F. Ferwerd,
had studied in Germany and adopted many elements
of National Socialist, Nazi, philosophy.
The concept of racial purity in particular
provided a rationalization for keeping black education inferior.
Ferwerd, then Minister of Native Affairs,
said that black Africans should be educated
for their opportunities in life
and that there was no place for them
above the level of certain forms of labor.
The Bantu Education Act helped pave the way
for labor strife in the 1980s and 1990s
by institutionalizing a plan to restrict black workers
to low-paid jobs through deliberately inferior education.
During the 1960s and 1970s,
per capita spending on white pupils
was about ten times greater than educational spending
on black pupils.
By the early 1990s, the gap had been reduced by half,
but in general, standards for teacher qualifications
and facilities in black schools
continued to be inferior to those in white schools.
The discrepancies in education among racial groups were glaring.
Teacher-pupil ratios in primary schools
averaged 1 to 18 in white schools,
1 to 24 in Asian schools,
1 to 27 in colored schools,
and 1 to 39 in black schools.
Moreover, whereas 96% of all teachers in white schools
had teaching certificates,
only 15% of teachers in black schools were certified.
Secondary school pass rates for black pupils
in the nationwide standardized high school graduation exams
were less than one-half the pass rate for whites.
You get the point, I think.
So what Hernstein and Murray have done here
in attempting to prove that a history of racial discrimination
in America is not depressing black IQ scores
is point to a study citing similar scores
in a system of open racial discrimination.
This is utterly ridiculous, obviously.
Anyway, we're now gonna take a look at some of these studies
compiled by Richard Lin,
and we'll start with this one, Woburn 1969,
which apparently reported an IQ score of 86 from Nigeria.
And here it is, the meaning and stability
of Raven's matrices test among Africans,
and let's read a little of that.
This paper aims to clarify our understanding of factors
affecting African scores on ability tests,
Raven's matrices in particular.
Though the main burden is theoretical,
some fresh data from Nigeria will be shown.
During 1965, a testing program was carried out
among factory workers in Nigeria.
The results from 86 men will be reported here.
They were tested individually in English or Pidgin
by the author with the aid of a trained Nigerian assistant.
Among the test battery were Raven's progressive matrices
and an adapted embedded figures test,
which with an index of educational attainment
are explained by Woburn.
Six months after the tests,
each man was given the matrices again.
There was no intervening coaching,
and the test was given as though it was to be a new experience
with full instructions repeated
and evidently equally necessary in most cases as previously.
Men were not overtly asked to pit their presence
against their previous efforts.
Results were presented in table one.
The relation between retested matrices and EFT
is significantly greater
than between the initial matrices testing and EFT,
even though in the former comparisons,
the tests were done six months apart.
Table one shows that the overall differences in retesting
were significant and suggests that improvements
were found particularly among the lower initial scorers.
Taken with the improved EFT correlation in table two,
a strong case can be made that the second testing
gave a distinctly more valid measure
of whatever abilities the matrices and EFT involve.
So to quickly summarize, in 1965,
researchers gave 86 Nigerian factory workers
the Raven's Progressive Matrices Test
and then gave it to them again six months later.
The second time they took the test,
they performed better overall,
and the results better correlated
with another test they took called the EFT.
And table one here shows both mean results,
15.9 the first time, increasing to 18.73 the second time.
What is missing here, you may have noticed, is an IQ score.
This study does not report an IQ score
for anyone involved in the test.
It reports their scores on the matrices test.
So why then does Lin's review cite Wober 1969
as having reported an IQ score of 86?
Well, looking at table one, 86 men took the test.
Do you see?
Now, most likely here, this is a simple typographical error,
and Lin, or whoever typed up his data,
accidentally wrote the number of test subjects
in the IQ field.
Regardless, though, Lin's review is not accurately
reporting the IQ score from Wober 1969
because there wasn't one.
Lin cites Wober 1969 again in his later book,
IQ and the Wealth of Nations,
where he says in 1965, norms for the standard
progressive matrices were collected by Wober 1969
for a sample of 86 adult men.
Their mean score was 15.9.
And then he later claims that this equates
to an IQ of 64.
Now, there are several lies by omission here.
Firstly, Wober 1969 did not report a mean score of 15.9.
It reported a mean score of 15.9
and a mean score of 18.73.
It showed how scores go up with retesting.
And additionally, it claims that a strong case
can be made that the second testing
gave a distinctly more valid measure
of whatever abilities the matrices and EFT involve.
Lin intentionally chooses to only report
the lower score here.
Another lie by omission here is that Lin declines
to mention that the sample of 86 adult men
were not randomly drawn from the general Nigerian population.
They were not an accurate representation
of the society where they lived,
and nor were they intended to be.
They were all factory workers.
Reporting the test results of only 86 men
who are all employed in the same job
as representative of a country,
which at the time had a population of 50 million people,
is... rubbish.
Just rubbish.
Next up, let's talk about this result,
an IQ of 75 for people in Zambia,
cited from Pons 1974 and Crawford Nutt 1976.
So the 1976 paper from Crawford Nutt is titled
Are Black Scores on Raven's Standard Progressive Matrices
an Artifact of Test Presentation?
And opens by saying that previous research has shown that
when the method of test presentation ensures
that testees understand adequately the requirements
of the test situation,
when the method also makes certain that the testees know
how items of the test are to be responded to,
and when the method reduces the anxiety of the subjects
about being tested,
then the results obtained from the administration of the test
are remarkably different from those that result
from administration in which the same test is presented
in the same way to all testees,
regardless of their cultural origin.
It goes on to detail how a researcher named Pons
gave the Raven's Standard Progressive Matrices test
to a group of Zambian copper miners in 1962,
using the standard method of delivery.
Then later, Pons administered the test again to another group,
only this time using a different method of test presentation.
As table one shows,
the second group showed a rather dramatic difference in score.
Now, the thinking behind all this might be
that a group of Zambian copper miners
aren't necessarily going to be all that familiar
with taking academic tests, not to generalize,
and if you want more accurate results,
it might be worth taking the time to actually explain to them
what it is that they're being expected to do.
Now, Crawford Knott claims
that the different method of presentation
did not alter anything about the test itself
and is based upon suggestions found in the 1960 guide
to the standard progressive matrices written by John C. Raven,
AKA the guy what invented the Raven's Progressive Matrices test.
After reporting the findings of Pons,
Crawford Knott takes things one step further
and tests a selection of pupils from a long-established high school
situated in the black residential area of Soweto near Johannesburg,
a school that is described as having high standards
and whose students would be used to being tested.
Crawford Knott tested two samples of these schoolchildren
using the same presentation method as described by Pons,
and the results received were actually slightly higher
than the equivalent age range of the white group
on whom the test was normalized.
Now, you might say, what has Crawford Knott actually proved there?
Test results go up the closer you get to a good school, I suppose.
This shouldn't be surprising anyone.
If you test a relatively uneducated group of copper miners,
you get one result.
Do that same test in a competitive academic institution
and you will get a higher result.
By changing the method of test presentation
and changing the group which you are testing,
you can get a whole range of results.
This is why researchers don't usually test people
in just one area, one workplace, or one school
and then try to pass off that singular result
as representative of the entire country that they live in.
That would be a remarkably ignorant thing to do.
Speaking of, back to Richard Lin and his claimed IQ of 75 for Zambia,
which cites both Pons and Crawford Knott
as the source of the data there.
So how did that happen?
Well, what Lin does is, he cites the much lower results
from the research carried out by Pons,
which are presented in Crawford Knott's paper,
and then completely ignores Crawford Knott's experiment in the school,
which reported results above the white norm.
The entire point of Crawford Knott's paper goes totally unmentioned by Lin,
who simply extracts the data that he wants and discards the rest.
He had data showing a black African test score
that was above the white norm,
and he simply decided to ignore it.
Also, like the previous paper we discussed,
this study did not report IQ scores for the testees.
Those are simply concocted by Lin
out of the Raven's progressive matrices data,
using a sophisticated statistical technique called guessing.
So to understand what Lin has done here,
we need to talk a little about IQ test construction and standardization.
And let's start with the bell curve.
Not the book this time, but the statistical distribution.
Now, IQ tests, as we know, return this bell curve, or normal distribution.
This means that the majority of the scores are clustered around the middle
and taper off towards the ends of the curve in a symmetrical way.
But why, you might ask, do they actually return this distribution?
Well, it's because that's how they're designed.
Psychometricians design IQ tests so that their results match the bell curve.
If the test they design is too easy,
then the bell curve will lean to the right,
as too many people will get high scores.
If the test is too hard, it will lean to the left,
as too many people get low scores.
And if the test doesn't differentiate between people to the right degree,
then too many people could be at either end of the curve.
So the test designers tinker with the difficulty of the test
until the results match the bell curve.
So why do psychometricians do this?
Well, it's because that's how they assume intelligence is distributed
throughout the human population.
Emphasis on assume here,
because we do not actually know how intelligence is distributed
throughout the human population.
Unless you specifically design for it,
tests do not necessarily return a bell curve distribution.
For example here,
the armed forces qualifying test used in the bell curve
did not return a bell curve distribution.
It was, after all, designed to test readiness to join the armed forces, not IQ.
As a result, it does not differentiate between people to a large enough degree,
so Hernstein and Murray, to make the results conform to a bell curve,
recalculated the scores.
Here is a graph of the raw AFQT scores overlaid with Hernstein and Murray's
recalculated bell curve scores from the book Inequality by Design.
And as we can see, too many people scored too highly on the test
and there isn't enough differentiation between people
on the upper end of the scale in particular.
So yes, that's right.
In the book The Bell Curve,
the principal intelligence test the authors use as a source
did not return a bell curve distribution.
To transform these results into a bell curve,
Hernstein and Murray exaggerated the slight differences at the end of the scale.
They basically gave extra credit for being near the tails of the bell curve
and less for being in the middle.
They did this as they explain in Appendix 2 to correct for skew.
But remember, in relation to how intelligence is distributed
throughout the human population,
these results are only actually skewed
if we assume that intelligence is distributed in a bell curve to begin with.
This is circular logic.
We are assuming the result that we are going to get beforehand
and then designing the test or just manipulating the data
in order to reach that conclusion.
Anyway, to get back on track here,
what does all this have to do with Richard Lin and the Raven's progressive matrices test?
Well, that test also does not return a bell curve distribution.
The results are not symmetrically distributed around their mean,
to quote an article by psychologist Leon Kamin.
That article also notes that the test's developer, John Raven,
always insisted that the progressive matrices scores cannot be converted into IQs.
Here is an example of the distribution of matrix test scores
from Raven's paper, Standardization of Progressive Matrices 1938.
And as you can see, those are some very wobbly bell curves right there.
What the test does give is raw scores which correspond to percentile scores.
So you can know from your raw score how you compare percentile-wise
to the group on which the test was normalized.
But these percentiles will not be distributed evenly around their mean in a bell curve.
To calculate IQ, Richard Lin takes the average of these raw scores,
converts them to a percentile score,
and then gives what the IQ of that percentile score would correspond to
if the results were in a bell curve distribution.
Basically, Lin is assuming a bell curve exists where there demonstrably isn't one
and is forcing the data to fit it.
Another issue here is that in the decades since the Second World War,
scores on the Raven's matrices test similar to IQ test scores had been changing.
Accordingly, the test had been standardized several times.
So when we're comparing the African results with Western norms,
we need to identify what norm group we're using
because comparisons with different groups from different times could give different results.
Particularly sharp-eyed viewers would have noticed that Lin does exactly this
in the quote from his 2002 book,
IQ and the Wealth of Nations, which I showed earlier,
where he discusses Nigerian IQs, quote,
in terms of the British 1979 standardization.
Identifying this standardization is important,
as using a different one could lead to a different Nigerian IQ being calculated.
In his 1991 review of the literature cited in the bell curve, however,
Lin does not identify what standardization he's using for the various tests he is comparing.
What this means is that there is a gap in Lin's calculations
that can only be filled by faith in his academic honesty,
which Hearnstein and Murray clearly have,
but I must confess that I do not.
Anyway, if you think what Lin did to those last two studies was bad,
strap in, because this next one is a real bastard.
South Africa IQ of 69, attributed to Owen, 1989,
which Lin calls the single best study of the Negroid Intelligence.
So this is test and item bias,
the suitability of the junior aptitude tests as a common test battery
for white, Indian, and black pupils in standard 7.
Owen is not one for catchy names, apparently.
The abstract to this study starts out,
This study was undertaken to shed light on problems
concerning the construction and use of a common test battery
for various South African population groups.
You see, this study is testing a test,
the Junior Aptitude Test, or JAT,
which was standardized for white pupils in South Africa
and determining whether it's also a good test to give to non-white groups.
The study selected various schools in South Africa for white, Indian, and black students.
Although it should be mentioned,
it was not able to use the majority of the selected black schools,
quote,
and thus they had to test black schools in the KwaZulu region,
one of the areas designated for black inhabitants of South Africa under apartheid.
I mention the unrest situation here as a reminder that,
yes, these tests are being carried out under apartheid,
and protests and demonstrations against the segregated school system were ongoing.
So anyway, the study examined pupils' performances
on the various sub-tests comprising the JAT,
and what were the findings?
Well, the thing I think we should mention first here
is that the tests were given to the black students in KwaZulu in English only,
and several test sections of the JAT relied very heavily upon language ability.
Now, Owen expected language ability not to matter in the tests
because the black students in the KwaZulu region
had ostensibly been learning English in their schools.
Owen apparently either doesn't know or disregards
that these schools often didn't have necessary teaching equipment,
only a small amount of their teachers were certified,
and that pupil-teacher ratios were more than double that of the white schools.
And to quote the study,
language was not expected to play a significant role in test performance in this investigation.
However, the results showed that this assumption was completely wrong.
In fact, language played such an important role,
and the knowledge of English of the majority of black testees was so poor
that certain tests, for example the JAT-4 synonyms
and the JAT-8 memory paragraph, proved to be virtually unusable.
And let me just quote that again.
Certain tests proved to be virtually unusable.
Owen also writes elsewhere,
the results of the current investigation clearly show that language played a prominent role
in all the tests containing language items,
which is a wonderful multiple stab wounds shown to shorten life expectancy,
bit of academic obviousness there.
Language ability was not the only way in which the Junior Aptitude Test was biased, however.
In a section entitled Item Bias in the Tests of the JAT,
Owen notes several ways in which the tests were culturally and economically biased.
For example, he here lists several test items on the first test in the JAT and states,
A common element in most of these items was that they presuppose knowledge
or a degree of knowledge on the part of the testee,
and mentions such things as electrical appliances,
microscopes, and Western types of ladies' accessories.
Going on to write,
Thus in the case of both the Indian and Black testees,
it seems that the single largest cause of bias lay in the fact that the pupils
were not familiar with the objects represented by the pictures.
Cultural and socioeconomic status factors probably also played a role in this regard.
So this test is biased, then.
The study examining it says it is biased,
but according to Richard Lin,
this is the single best study of the Negroid Intelligence.
This is the best one.
The one that tests segregated school children in a non-native language
and calls its own results virtually unusable.
In Lin's review,
this is the most important study for his estimates of Black African IQ.
Writing about it, he says,
The mean IQ of the sample in comparison with Caucasoid South African norms is 69.
It is also around the median of the studies listed in Table 3.
It is proposed, therefore, to round this figure up to 70.
Why?
And take this as the approximate mean for pure Negroids.
God damn.
What Lin has done here is ridiculous.
He has taken 11 studies from a period between 1929 and 1991,
with vastly different sample sizes reporting data from different tests,
most of which didn't even report IQ scores,
transformed the data into what he reckons the equivalent IQ scores were
using some unknown standardization,
picked one that was sort of near the middle,
and said that's the average Black African IQ.
This is outrageous.
It is a crime.
It might actually be a crime, and if it's not, it should be.
Now, I am far from the first person to criticize
the Bell Curve's reliance upon Richard Lin as a source.
Various academics were already well aware of Lin and his dodgy data,
so when Herrnstein and Murray cited him,
they were immediately attacked with accusations of bias and racism.
Charles Murray responds to these attacks in the afterword to the Bell Curve,
and his defense is laughable.
His first defense is to say that the topic of African IQ
is a tiny piece of the Bell Curve, three paragraphs on pages 288 to 89,
and in regards to this, two responses jump to mind immediately.
The first is to say, well, maybe you should have spent longer on it then, Charles.
We were wrong very quickly.
Isn't a defense against being wrong, is it?
Maybe if you put a little more effort in,
you would have seen that Lin's paper was a load of rubbish.
Secondly, this part of the Bell Curve is far more important than Murray makes out.
He uses Lin's paper to dismiss the arguments
that black-white differences in IQ are caused by environmental factors,
such as a history of oppression,
which is the single most common counterargument
to one of the principal claims in the entire book.
At no point does Murray actually address any specific criticisms of Lin's work
or any of its various errors.
He mainly just seems outraged that anyone dares to have criticized him at all, to be honest.
And it's exactly this sort of academic laziness
that fed much of the angry response to the Bell Curve.
Murray refuses to admit that citing Lin was a mistake,
and simply throws out some newer studies that supposedly show he was right anyway.
So there.
This speaks to a couple of things.
Firstly, it is a fatal underestimation of exactly how badly this damages
the faith that a reader of the Bell Curve can have in its authors.
After all, this is not the only time they cite Richard Lin.
He has more than 20 citations in their bibliography,
and they thank him specifically in the acknowledgments.
If this is the sort of data that Charles Murray is willing to accept as legitimate,
how can we trust anything he says anywhere in the book?
How can we trust the new studies he brings up to defend Richard Lin?
Personally, I think it would be a mistake to even look at these new studies.
Murray's response to having his previous sources called into question
is to simply throw out new sources.
His response to having these called into question would no doubt be to throw out more.
The responsibility for checking whether his sources are trustworthy or accurate
has been moved from Murray to his critics.
They're the ones doing the reading and the fact-checking,
whereas he never gets held to account.
So long as we all understand that, however, I suppose we can take a brief peek.
So, Murray says,
Let me turn to two studies post-dating Richard Lin's review that we cite on page 289.
One was a South African study led by Kenneth Owen,
published in the refereed British journal Personality and Individual Differences.
So this was the suitability of Raven's standard progressive matrices
for various groups in South Africa,
a paper that was published in 1992.
So we are still in apartheid South Africa.
And this study tested black students from the KwaZulu region,
the same as one of the studies from Richard Lin's review.
It even has the same author.
So this is not a great showing with the first study here.
Murray introduces the other study by saying,
The second example of a recent careful study
was conducted by a black scholar, Fred Cindy, and published in The Psychologist.
It matched 204 black Zimbabwean pupils
and 202 white English students from London inner-city schools
for age, 12 to 14 years old, sex, and educational level,
both samples being characterized as working class,
and then goes on to say that the white students from London
got higher test results than the black students from Zimbabwe.
However, Murray takes the cue from Richard Lin and leaves out all the context.
The main thing here being that Zimbabwe was a British colony known as Rhodesia
until it gained independence in 1980, following a 15-year civil war.
Rhodesia was a discriminatory racially segregated state.
12 to 14-year-olds in 1994 would have been born around the time of Zimbabwe's independence
to parents who were raised and educated in a segregated British colony.
Which makes the comparison to the children of London as all the more ridiculous here.
The children of the colonized country are being measured
against the children of the colonizing country.
Fred Cindy, the professor who offered the study,
more recently spoke about his earlier work in the following way.
For many years, African countries have depended upon the use
of Western-designed psychometric instruments
such as Raven's progressive matrices and some others.
Such tests, standardized in Western cultures using Western cultural values,
have been found to be useful to a certain extent.
In many cases, interpretation of results from Western-designed tests
have however been distorted to suit Western stereotypes about other nations.
Cindy 1994.
A very important point which Lin and Murray would do well to take on board.
Murray reveals a misunderstanding of the criticisms raised against the bell curve
when he goes on to say that the problem is not as often alleged
that such studies are written by racists.
In the two instances just cited,
a charge belied by Owen's scholarly reputation and by Cindy's race,
but that the African story is still so incomplete.
What Murray gets wrong here,
beyond the implication that a scholarly reputation
could not also be accompanied by racism,
is that the allegation is not that these studies are written by racists.
It's that the studies are being deliberately misinterpreted
and misrepresented by racists.
Racists like Richard Lin,
who stripped from the studies all context and analysis
and used them to push a racist worldview.
Murray fails to see that the problem is not that it is impossible
to find other studies that have similar results to the ones cited in the bell curve.
It's that he's willing to treat data collected in a segregated white supremacist state
as a legitimate source to inform us about inherent racial differences.
That is the issue here.
On a more general note,
what Murray writes in the afterword and how he writes it
shows us exactly how little respect he has
for what should be treated as a sensitive topic.
The subject of his writing is potential differences
in native ability between racial groups,
and discussing that requires a level of tact and consideration
that is totally absent here.
You cannot half-ass the science with this stuff.
Murray's refusal to respond directly to criticism of his sources here
exposes him as a fraud.
We're going to move on now and consider how the bell curve measures intelligence
against socioeconomic status in determining one's life outcomes.
But I'd like you to keep in mind, if possible,
several of the things we've talked about so far.
The difficulty in defining intelligence.
The difficulties in testing for intelligence.
The bell curve's missing genetic evidence for IQ.
And of course, the incredibly shoddy sources
that Hernstein and Murray are apparently willing to accept.
When we see a graph measuring intelligence against environment,
we should not be fooled into thinking that that intelligence
was legitimately or accurately calculated.
Anyway, to the claim.
One's IQ is more important than one's social background
in determining one's life outcomes.
To address this claim, we first need to define the terms.
We know by now how Hernstein and Murray have been determining
the IQ of the people they're examining
by using their scores on the Armed Forces Qualifying Test.
But in order to make comparisons to their IQ,
how is the bell curve determining those people's socioeconomic status?
Let's take as an example poverty from Chapter 5 of the bell curve titled Poverty.
Hernstein and Murray want to compare low intelligence
with low socioeconomic status as causes for poverty
to figure out which is more important.
They use the survey respondents' AFQT scores as their data for intelligence,
and they use socioeconomic information provided by the respondents
to build what they call an index of socioeconomic status.
Both of these are then compared with the likelihood of the respondents
being below the poverty line a decade later.
And of course, Hernstein and Murray find that intelligence
is the better predictor of poverty.
So I guess we'd better examine exactly how Hernstein and Murray
constructed their index of socioeconomic status.
But before we get to that, I'd like to propose a question for us to answer.
What environmental factors would you deem important
with regards to the likelihood of a young person being in poverty?
And let's discuss a few possibilities here.
First up, parental socioeconomic status,
which is usually defined as their level of education, occupation, and income.
I think we'd all agree that is fairly important.
Families that have a larger income are less likely to be in poverty.
Better educated parents are more likely to have better jobs
and therefore less likely to have children in poverty.
This is rather straightforward.
Family composition is important.
A family with a particular income and living space
stretched to take care of six children, say,
is gonna have a harder time than a family with the same income and living space
but only one child to take care of.
So number of siblings is important,
as is whether or not the individual was raised in a two-parent family.
Two parents typically means more resources
and therefore less chance of being in poverty.
The area where someone lives is very important.
One family with a particular income might have a very different living experience
to another family with the same income that lives in a different area.
And this could be for a variety of reasons.
Average living expenses like rent, food, and other costs that vary from place to place,
the average crime rate, the unemployment rate,
that can be very important for determining one's chance of being in poverty.
Seems fairly obvious to mention,
but you're gonna have an easier time finding an income
in an area with many jobs than an area with few jobs.
Another reason the area someone lives is important to us here is school quality,
which should be particularly noteworthy,
given that we're measuring all of this against performance on an academic test.
How long someone stays in school is also important,
and how many years of education they completed
both before and after taking the armed forces qualifying test.
Familial wealth is important, and this is a separate issue to income.
One person with a particular income,
whose rich parents bought them a house and a car and paid their way through college,
is gonna have a different experience to a person on the same income,
but who has to pay off debt related to all of those things.
Overall, economic trends can be very important.
You are more likely to be in poverty during a recession.
The reason that the poverty rate increases during recessions
is not because everyone collectively loses a few IQ points, is it?
And the effects of recession are felt unequally across economic classes
and different geographical areas.
One's gender is important.
Women, for example, are more likely to be in poverty than men are.
Now, whether you believe this is because women have lower genetic IQs than men do,
or you're sensible and you believe it's because of environmental reasons,
it is the case.
I should note here that I'm excluding race
because this chapter of the bell curve concerns itself
with only the white respondents to the AFQT.
Your health is important, of course.
People with disabilities, for instance, are more likely to be in poverty,
and particularly in the US, the cost of medical care and health insurance
can massively affect someone's likelihood of being in poverty.
And we could go on listing things, but we will arbitrarily stop here.
I trust you get the point by now.
There are lots of different things to consider
when attempting to determine how someone's environment
might contribute to them being in poverty.
Which brings us back to the bell curve.
Which of the various factors on this list
did Hernstein and Murray think were important
with regards to the likelihood of a young person being in poverty?
The first one.
Yep, that's all.
Hernstein and Murray's consideration of environmental factors
extends to parental education, income, and occupation.
That's all.
As far as they're concerned,
with regards to the determining predictors of poverty,
all the other things on this list have no effect.
Your family's wealth has no effect.
Family composition, the area where you live,
the quality of the school you went to, the crime rate, all irrelevant.
What they have done here is substitute environmental factors
for parental socioeconomic status,
which is a much narrower category of variables.
They simply add together parental education, income, and occupation,
call that parental socioeconomic status, and plot it against IQ.
And this is the graph they come up with.
The comparative roles of IQ and parental SES
in determining whether young white adults are below the poverty line.
It shows that people with low IQs are more likely to be in poverty
than people whose parents had a low SES.
And also the reverse.
High IQ people are less likely to be in poverty
than people whose parents had a high SES.
Cognitive ability is more important
than parental socioeconomic status in determining poverty, they say.
But of course, as we have seen,
their consideration of environmental factors here is laughably narrow.
They only want to consider as valid things
that fall under their definition of parental SES.
And they ignore all the other relevant environmental factors.
What would happen to this graph if we also considered the various other things
that Hernstein and Murray leave out of their analysis?
Now, I don't know how to do regression analysis, unfortunately,
but the book Inequality by Design was written by some people
who do know how to do regression analysis,
and they do exactly what we're looking for here.
Firstly, they recreate Hernstein and Murray's calculations using their data.
They then use the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth Responses
to add more environmental data to the analysis.
Their first updated graph changes parental SES to parental home environment,
adding for consideration things like the number of siblings
and whether the household has two parents.
As we can see, AFQT score is still more important than parental home environment,
but now the two are much closer together.
Next up, they add community environment to home environment,
considering the region where the respondent lived when they took the test
and the school that they attended.
Doing this, we see that AFQT score and social environment are now equal.
Next, they add for consideration the number of years of education
of the respondents to the survey.
And by now, the AFQT score has slipped
below the combined environmental factors in importance.
Using the same statistical methods and data set as the bell curve,
Inequality by Design's analysis shows that environmental factors
are more important than AFQT score
in determining the probability of being in poverty.
And this is shown using only the limited data available
in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, remember.
Inequality by Design adds to the analysis only a few
of the conceivable socioeconomic factors that are ignored by Hernstein and Murray.
If we were to continue adding in available factors to consider,
the effect of IQ would get weaker and weaker.
And lest you think Inequality by Design's analysis was a one-off,
the authors of Intelligence, Genes, and Success also reanalyzed the NLSY data,
and with regards to how much cognitive ability
accounts for differences in wages between people, say the following.
However, our results conflict with the predictions of Hernstein and Murray.
Ability factors other than G are economically useful.
Compared with education, family background, and region of residence,
G explains little of the variance in wages.
If there exists some X factor that can explain the large residuals
common in wage regressions, it is not measured cognitive ability.
In summary, our re-analyses of the NLSY data originally analyzed by Hernstein and Murray
show measured cognitive ability is correlated with wages,
but explains little of the variance in wages across individuals and time.
Later in this chapter, Hernstein and Murray use this same narrowly defined parental SES
to consider which young people will drop out of school, get a college degree,
be unemployed, have children out of wedlock, be on welfare, and so on.
To be fair, sometimes they do add other factors to consider,
but again, only when they personally, subjectively, decide those factors are important.
All their comparisons between IQ and SES that inform their later policy proposals
are based upon this calculated decision to not consider
the full range of relevant environmental factors.
And there's two other important points that we have to keep in mind here.
The first is that we have been assuming that AFQT score
is a legitimate stand-in for cognitive ability,
which, given all the potential problems with intelligence testing we've already discussed,
is a bit of a stretch.
The second thing we need to remember is that Hernstein and Murray's estimation of IQ
is that it is only 60% genetically heritable.
That would mean, according to their flawed understanding of heritability anyway,
that 40% of the IQ score in their calculations originated from environmental factors.
Considering all these things together, the case for IQ here is looking incredibly flimsy.
So as we've seen, once you add more factors to consider, environment trumps IQ.
So we now have to ask, is this a legitimate thing to do, statistically speaking?
The bell curve anticipates being criticized in this manner.
In a section titled, But What About Other Explanations?, they write,
We can already hear critics saying, if only they'd added this other variable to the analysis,
they would have seen that intelligence has nothing to do with x.
At this point, however, statistical analysis can become a bottomless pit.
It is not uncommon in technical journals to read articles built around the estimated effects
of a dozen or more independent variables.
Sometimes the entire set of variables is loaded into a single regression equation.
Sometimes sets of equations are used, modeling even more complex relationships
in which all the variables can exert mutual effects on one another.
Why should we not press forward?
Why not also ask if religious background has an effect on the decision to go on welfare, for example?
It's an interesting question, as are 50 others that might come to mind.
This is the first of two defenses by Hanstein and Murray,
where they argue that it would just be too complicated to consider all the factors.
Why there could be 50 environmental variables affecting someone's likelihood of being in poverty,
that's just too many.
It would be too complex.
Our graph wouldn't make any sense if we did that.
So instead of 50, we're just gonna consider, I don't know, two.
This is a result of treating the method of investigation
as more important than getting accurate results.
If you can't use regression analysis to fairly compare IQ
to all the relevant environmental factors, don't.
You know, you don't actually have to do this.
Hanstein and Murray's second defense is even more telling than the first.
Our principle was to explore additional dynamics
when there was another factor that was not only conceivably important,
but for clear logical reasons might be important
because of dynamics having little or nothing to do with IQ.
This last proviso is crucial,
for one of the most common misuses of regression analysis
is to introduce an additional variable
that in reality is mostly another expression of variables that are already in the equation.
So what Hanstein and Murray are saying is that they dismissed variables
if they deemed them to merely be mostly expressions of IQ,
which is already in the equation.
They only considered additional factors
when they had little or nothing to do with IQ
and were, quote, conceivably important.
Which should lead us to ask a question.
How are Hanstein and Murray deciding which variables are conceivably important?
And how are they deciding how much they have to do with IQ?
And the answer, of course, is subjectively.
They're only considering things that they reckon are important.
You see, the problem with Hanstein and Murray dismissing variables
that they have subjectively decided are merely expressions of cognitive ability here
is that they think that socioeconomic status itself is an expression of cognitive ability.
Later in the book, when criticizing the practice of controlling for SES between racial groups,
they write,
the difficulty comes in interpreting what it means to control for socioeconomic status.
Matching the status of the groups is usually justified on the grounds
that the scores people earn are caused to some extent by their socioeconomic status.
So if we want to see the real or authentic difference between them,
the contribution of status must be excluded.
The trouble is that socioeconomic status is also a result of cognitive ability,
as people of high and low cognitive ability
move to correspondingly high and low places in the socioeconomic continuum.
Now, this is circular logic.
Hanstein and Murray claim to be limiting which factors they're considering
to avoid including those which are merely expressions of other factors,
but their main comparison here is between cognitive ability and socioeconomic status,
which they elsewhere argue is a result of cognitive ability.
Using this framework, where cognitive ability determines both IQ and socioeconomic status,
the whole series of comparisons from this chapter of the bell curve
seems cynical and unnecessary.
Hanstein and Murray have already decided what conclusion they're gonna come to,
that cognitive ability is more important than all the other variables,
and all their statistical comparisons read as them just going through the motions
to get that result.
In simply declaring socioeconomic status the result of cognitive ability,
the bell curve brings to mind the chicken and egg problem here.
You see, a lot of disagreements over IQ
stem from different interpretations of the same data.
Let's say you do a study which proves a strong positive correlation
between the amount of time someone has spent in education and their IQ,
and you present those findings to two groups of people.
One group that favors environmental explanations
and one that favors genetic explanations.
Now, of course, the environmentalists will say,
this result makes perfect sense.
The longer you're in education, the more things you learn,
the better you get at answering the sorts of questions that show up on IQ tests,
the more familiar you are with taking academic tests in the first place.
IQ clearly stems from environment.
The genetic-minded folks, on the other hand, will say,
of course, this result makes perfect sense.
People with higher IQs favor an academic environment,
and they're more likely to stay in school longer
because that's the smarter thing to do.
Since they have higher IQs to begin with,
they will naturally make better choices.
Environment clearly stems from IQ.
So which came first, the chicken or the egg?
Environment or cognitive ability?
We can phrase this two ways.
A parent's higher cognitive ability leads to a better environment,
which again leads to a higher cognitive ability in their children.
Or we can say that a better environment
leads to a parent's higher cognitive ability,
which then produces a better environment for their children.
But both of these ways of phrasing are merely presenting
a segment of the overall environment-cognitive ability logic chain.
The bell curve solves the conundrum of whether
cognitive ability or environment should come first by saying...
cognitive ability.
That's first.
We like that one the most, so that's the one that comes first.
But of course, this is completely arbitrary,
and also, ultimately, incorrect.
To understand this, we need to talk about another of the main problems
with the scientific arguments of the bell curve,
which is that Herrnstein and Murray are conspicuously uninterested
in the causes of the things that they're talking about.
Much of the bell curve, for instance, is concerned with proving
that there are substantial differences in cognitive ability
between different designated racial groups.
But what Herrnstein and Murray never seriously concern themselves with
is why this supposed divergence happened.
Population groups don't evolve to be different for no reason, do they?
If one group developed better cognitive skills than another group,
there would have to be some mechanism there
that was leading to higher cognitive ability in that group,
or, I suppose, leading to lower cognitive ability in the other group.
Now, this could simply be direct evolutionary pressure,
as in different levels of cognitive ability in different groups
are being directly selected for.
Or it could be an indirect, unintended effect
of a different trait being selected for,
or some sort of genetic drift,
as generations of different population groups
are isolated enough from each other
to develop in significantly different ways.
Whatever the reason, though, there would have to be a reason.
And we should expect a scientist attempting to argue
for a substantial difference in ability between different groups
to therefore maybe be interested in exactly why this difference came about, right?
One of the only times that Herrnstein and Murray
show any interest in this question
is in Appendix Five, where they discuss the work
of Canadian psychologist J. Philippe Rushton,
who wrote the book Race, Evolution, and Behavior in 1995.
Rushton alleges that brain and genital size are inversely related,
and that larger genitals correlate with an increased fertility.
So at some point, different designated racial groups diverged from one another
and developed different traits according to some sort of trade-off system.
So it's like a computer game where you have limited points
to put into your starting stats,
only here the starting stats are int and genital size.
In 1988, Rushton was reprimanded by the University of Western Ontario
for carrying out two particular studies.
He surveyed first-year psychology students
and then male customers at a Toronto shopping mall,
asking them questions about their sex lives,
the size of their penises,
and the exact distance that they ejaculate.
Now, I can only speak for myself here,
but I can't say I've ever measured.
One therefore wonders how reliable this self-reported data could be.
Or, who knows, maybe I'm the anomaly here.
Maybe all you penis-havers out there are keeping detailed daily statistics.
I don't know.
One also wonders about exactly how distance is supposed to come into play here.
For want of a better phrase.
What does this Rushton guy think is going on in the bedroom?
Does he think you have to hit a moving target or something?
I don't know.
Rushton's work also uses the same caucasoid, mongoloid,
negroid categorization that Richard Limb uses.
And to quote a response to Rushton's theories
by Canadian psychologist Zach Cenovsky,
some of Rushton's references to scientific literature
with respects to racial differences and sexual characteristics
turned out to be references to a non-scientific semi-pornographic book
and to an article in the penthouse forum.
I am mentioning Rushton and his weird genital theories here,
not just because they're funny to relate, which they certainly are,
but because he and his research are defended in the bell curve.
Herrnstein and Murray relay his ideas before stating,
However, Rushton's work is not that of a crackpot or a bigot,
as many of his critics are given to charging.
But they're wrong there, of course.
He is a crackpot and a bigot.
Or he was, anyway. He's dead now.
As for why Herrnstein and Murray seem so disinterested
in examining causes for the things that they're discussing,
I can only speculate here.
But I suspect it's because, at least with regards to the bell curve, anyway,
Herrnstein and Murray are not scientists.
They didn't even submit the bell curve for peer review prior to its publication.
They are here to advance a conservative social and political agenda,
and all the air quotes science is just window dressing for that agenda.
And that's what we're going to talk about next.
So then, the politics of the bell curve.
And I'd like to first talk a bit more about why the bell curve was so controversial.
And there's one main reason comprised of two, uh, sub reasons.
The first is that Herrnstein and Murray spend a large part of their book
asserting differences in intelligence between designated racial groups.
And we have to wonder why they even did this,
because it isn't important at all for their overall point.
Their main argument is that IQ is the most important factor
determining success or failure in life,
and they seemingly don't need the racial element at all to make this point.
Or do they?
In a section titled How Ethnic Differences Fit Into the Story,
they write the following.
In part one, we described the formation of a cognitive elite.
Given the cognitive differences among ethnic and racial groups,
the cognitive elite cannot represent all groups equally,
a statement with implications that we will develop in part four.
Part four being the section of the book comprised of their policy proposals,
and it is these policy proposals that are the second part of the reason
for the bell curve being such a controversial book.
More than either of these things individually being controversial,
it's how they interact that really produces the controversy.
You see, for all Herrnstein and Murray's posturing about how brave they're being,
speaking out and breaking taboos and all that,
it is not actually controversial in the scientific community
to simply acknowledge group differences in IQ.
Let's imagine that instead of the bell curve,
Herrnstein and Murray had simply published a list of IQ test results
showing differences in IQ in different countries.
Nobody would have cared.
Researchers from across the political spectrum
work with intelligence test data all the time.
Some environment-minded researchers,
because they acknowledge that the group differences exist,
but they want to prove that environmental factors
are the key to understanding them.
Nor is it controversial to assert that differences in cognitive ability
in general are partially due to genetics.
There are a whole host of genetic conditions that can affect someone's cognitive ability.
Right-wingers who characterize lefties as die-hard,
100% environmentalists miss the point here,
as we'd actually be hasty to point out the ableism
in denying the effects of those genetic conditions.
So it's not simply that Herrnstein and Murray are breaking the supposed taboo
of discussing IQ differences that sparked the backlash.
It's that they explicitly link those differences to a set of policy proposals.
This is why the bell curve is controversial, because of its political ideas.
So let's talk about those.
First off, the enormous glaring problem
with the vast majority of Herrnstein and Murray's policy proposals
is that they absolutely do not logically follow
from any of their previous claims in the bell curve.
And if it sounds like I'm exaggerating there, trust me, I am not.
Take, for instance, their account of programs like Head Start
that are designed to help disadvantaged kids.
Herrnstein and Murray acknowledge that these programs
can have temporary positive effects,
but they argue that these positive effects fade over time
and become statistically insignificant by the time those children leave school.
This is taken by Herrnstein and Murray as proof
that there is ultimately nothing to be done to help these kids.
Any temporary positive effects will simply fade away
due to their inferior genetics.
So we should stop wasting money on them
and instead give it to the naturally gifted children.
This does not follow, however.
There is an alternative interpretation of this situation,
which is perfectly consistent
with a majority environmental understanding of childhood development.
We can argue that these programs produce a positive effect
because they are changing the children's environment.
Any diminished effects after the programs stop
are because the programs stopped,
thus changing the environment back to the norm.
So instead of abandoning these programs,
we should instead take them as proof
that environmental changes can produce positive effects
and then expand them, increase their funding,
have equivalent programs for every stage of school life.
Any later diminished effects are proof that we aren't trying hard enough,
not that what we're trying to do is impossible.
Nearly every policy proposal in the bell curve
has this sort of alternative explanation.
One of their proposals for dissuading low IQ mothers from having children
is to stop the welfare programs that support them.
But as we know, richer people tend to have fewer children,
and birth rates are lower in countries with comprehensive welfare programs.
Making these women poorer will not make them have fewer children.
And besides, Hernstein and Murray are arguing
that these women are resolutely unintelligent.
So if that were true,
why would we be expecting them to be able to plan ahead
and reason logically that having fewer children is a good idea?
That they're not supposed to be able to plan well for the future
is kind of the whole point, right?
What Hernstein and Murray could have done here
is some very basic comparisons between the United States and other countries.
They scaremonger about the possible effects of welfare programs
which exist in Europe in abundance, for instance.
But since those European welfare programs
have not led to the sort of utter catastrophe
that Hernstein and Murray prophesize,
they instead choose to focus only on the United States.
Even if Hernstein and Murray had proven
that some groups were genetically less intelligent than others,
cutting welfare would not follow from that.
Rather, one could make the argument that those groups would deserve more welfare
because they would have an unfair disadvantage in school and in work
that would not be their fault.
And even worse than Hernstein and Murray's logic simply not following,
their proposals sometimes actually directly contradict with their previous analysis.
For example, let's talk about affirmative action.
As mentioned earlier, Hernstein and Murray really don't like affirmative action.
And as we've also seen, they are very worried
about the supposed cognitive stratification of society.
And let's briefly quote them talking about that.
In this penultimate chapter, we speculate about the impact
of cognitive stratification on American life and government.
Predicting the course of society is chancy,
but certain tendencies seem strong enough to worry about.
An increasingly isolated cognitive elite,
a merging of the cognitive elite with the affluent,
a deteriorating quality of life for people
at the bottom end of the cognitive ability distribution.
Unchecked, these trends will lead the US towards something resembling a caste society
with the underclass mired ever more firmly at the bottom
and the cognitive elite ever more firmly anchored at the top,
restructuring the rules of society
so that it becomes harder and harder for them to lose.
Among the other casualties of this process
would be American civil society as we have known it.
Like other apocalyptic visions, this one is pessimistic, perhaps too much so.
On the other hand, there is much to be pessimistic about.
Now what Hernstein and Murray fail to spot here
is that a policy of aggressive affirmative action
would directly work to check the cognitive partitioning
that they call frightening and apocalyptic.
If Harvard or some other fancy school
decided they were gonna admit a certain percentage of applicants
based upon some characteristic other than test scores,
then there would be that same number of applicants with higher test scores
who would therefore not get into Harvard
and have to go to their next choice of college.
And the next smartest people who would have gone to that college
will now not get in and have to go to their next choice
and so on down the line.
And if this ruthless affirmative action policy
was adopted by the group of colleges as a whole,
the cognitive elite would be forced to spread out
throughout the whole college pool,
which would have the added effect of spreading them out geographically too.
Hernstein and Murray really should have spotted this,
since earlier in the book they talk fondly
about Harvard's policy of admitting legacy applicants,
those usually being people whose fathers had graduated from Harvard.
They also mention applicants being considered for things like
his potential as a quarterback or stroke for the eight-man shell
and other non-academic qualities.
Curiously, Hernstein and Murray do not criticize
Harvard's practice of admitting people for non-academic reasons.
When it comes to affirmative action, however,
Hernstein and Murray are very clear about that being unfair,
and I quote,
"...to what extent is a society fair
when people of similar ability and background
are treated as differently as they are now?"
In 1964, the answer would have been unambiguous.
Such a society is manifestly unfair.
The logic was right then, and right now.
So colleges admitting applicants for non-academic reasons,
such as their father having gone there, that's okay.
It's counteracting the dreaded cognitive partitioning of society, after all.
But colleges admitting applicants because of affirmative action,
well that is, rather dramatically,
leaking a poison into the American soul.
So how do we account for this apparent contradiction
on behalf of Hernstein and Murray?
Well, what would you imagine to be the most likely difference
between a legacy Harvard applicant and an affirmative action applicant?
I will leave it to you to ponder that one.
Instead of the unfair and poisonous racial affirmative action,
Hernstein and Murray argue instead for a race-blind version of affirmative action
based, bizarrely, on test scores.
And I say bizarrely here because this idea would actually accelerate
the supposedly apocalyptic cognitive partitioning.
They say that in the case of two candidates
who are fairly closely matched otherwise,
universities should give the nod to the applicant from the disadvantaged background.
Now, I agree with this in isolation here.
I do think that if you have two similar candidates,
you should admit the less privileged one.
But with regards to Hernstein and Murray's fears of cognitive partitioning, though,
this is exactly what they were worried about.
College is becoming better at collecting all of society's high IQ people together
and funneling them into high IQ jobs in high IQ areas.
They've basically said,
here's an apocalyptic problem and now here's how to make it happen faster.
And actually, regarding the concept of affirmative action,
their logic is all wrong there.
At the start of the chapter titled Affirmative Action in Higher Education,
Hernstein and Murray recount an affirmative action controversy from 1991
where a law student at Georgetown University, quote,
surreptitiously compiled the entrance statistics
for a sample of applicants to Georgetown's law school
and then published the results of his research in the law school student newspaper.
He revealed that the mean on the law school aptitude test
differed by a large margin for accepted black and white students.
Hernstein and Murray dubbed this difference
the ethnic premium or edge that minority applicants
are supposedly being afforded in the admissions process
and go on to detail how they've looked at the college admissions data
from 26 colleges and found that in the classes entering those in 1991 and 92,
the average SAT scores of the black students
were below the average SAT scores of the white students.
Hernstein and Murray take this as proof
that black students have an unfair edge in the college admissions process.
Quote, the summary statement about affirmative action in undergraduate institutions
is that being either a black or a Latino
is worth a great deal in the admissions process
at every undergraduate school for which we have data.
However, this method of measuring the supposed results of affirmative action
is entirely incorrect.
There is a crucial flaw in the logic here
and it begins with Hernstein and Murray's decision to begin their analysis
by looking at the college entrance data instead of earlier
by thinking about the wider pool of college applicants.
So black people have historically had lower SAT scores than white people.
Now whether you believe this is due to some fixed genetically originated lower IQ
or you're sensible and you believe it's down to environmental reasons,
it is the case.
So in any random group of students applying to a college in the United States,
we would expect the scores of the black students to be on average
lower than the white students if you follow.
So what happens next is the college takes a look at this group of applicants
and decides to omit some of them using certain criteria.
So test scores but usually various other things
like extracurricular activities and whatever else.
So all the accepted students get in
and all the denied students go off to apply somewhere else, right?
Then Hernstein and Murray come along to the college
and they notice that the scores of the black students
are on average below the white students
and thus start decrying the terrible unfairness of affirmative action.
But what they've missed here is that this discrepancy
between the average black and white scores would still exist
even if the college admissions process only considered test scores and nothing else.
And let's think about this.
Imagine an American college in 1991
with a certain amount of positions to fill
and they get a larger group of students applying for those positions, right?
So they have to let some in and not others.
In that group of applicants there will be a range of test scores
and the black applicants will have on average lower scores than the white applicants.
And let's say this college only admits people via test scores
so if they have 1,000 positions to fill
they only accept the top 1,000 SAT scores and they send everyone else packing.
Now in this group of 1,000 successful applicants
there will still be both black and white people
but of those black people who scored high enough to get in
they will be on average towards the lower end of the range.
Meaning the black group average will still be lower than the white group average
even though they all scored high enough to get in.
Even in a world without affirmative action
and even with a totally racially blind admissions policy
and accepting Hearnstein and Murray's positions regarding racial IQ scores
a disparity between black and white SAT scores in college intake groups would still exist.
The only way we could fairly expect the two averages to be the same
is if the black and white students in that 1991 applicant pool
also had on average the same scores.
And since Hearnstein and Murray have just spent a huge section of their book
arguing for black people's lower cognitive ability
I don't know why they'd be expecting that.
Moving on from affirmative action I'd like to ask a question.
Can the politics of the bell curve be described as eugenics?
And I mean yes, right?
They're arguing for policies with the agenda of changing birth rates
for particular groups of people.
They want lower IQ mothers to have fewer children.
Hearnstein and Murray stop short of openly embracing eugenics however.
They pull a rhetorical trick by saying they're simply worried about dysgenics.
Dysgenics being the opposite of eugenics there.
So we're not necessarily for it but we are anti the opposite of it.
You know, it's very clever.
One telling quote here is when Hearnstein and Murray talking about the Nazis say the following
followed by the terrors of Nazism and its perversion of eugenics
that effectively wiped the idea from public discourse in the West.
Now the phrase perversion of eugenics should set off some alarm bells there
implying apparently that there is a good sort of eugenics
and the Nazis just did it wrong or took it too far or something.
Or maybe there was just something uniquely evil about Nazi eugenics
that wasn't present in the supposedly good eugenics.
Is that true?
Well, let's find out.
The footage you're seeing here is from a movie called Herb Crank.
In English, the Hereditary Defective.
This is a 1936 propaganda film produced by the Nazi party's racial policy office.
It features video shots at German psychiatric hospitals
of people with various types of disabilities
interspersed with text informing the audience, among other things,
of the expense of caring for these people.
Going on to argue that the prevention of hereditarily sick offspring is a moral duty.
Now I'm not actually showing the images of the people in the video here
as they almost certainly did not consent to be in a film
which was used to propagandize in favor of their sterilization
and I would feel uncomfortable including that footage in my video.
Herb Crank is available online though if you prefer to watch it unedited.
The film ends with the quote,
the farmer who prevents the overgrowth of the weed promotes the valuable.
The purpose of this film was obviously to increase public support
for the involuntary sterilization of people with disabilities,
a Nazi program that would escalate into outright mass murder just a few years later.
Adolf Hitler was reportedly a fan of Herb Crank
and encouraged the production of a sequel titled
Victims of the Past, The Sin Against Blood and Race
which was shown in cinemas throughout Nazi Germany in 1937.
So why am I talking about Herb Crank here?
Is this simply a slippery slope argument perhaps?
Look where all this eugenics rubbish leads to the Nazis and the Holocaust.
Now although I think that would be a fair point to make actually,
no this particular movie has a much more direct link to what we're talking about today.
Now something that might come as a shock to you
and it certainly did to me in the process of researching this video
is the extent of the international eugenics movement prior to World War II.
Nazi eugenicists were not operating in a bubble
and most importantly for us here is that they had a reciprocal relationship
with American eugenicists.
You see Herb Crank had another big fan in addition to Hitler.
So this guy is Harry H. Loughlin, an American eugenicist,
director of the Eugenics Record Office
and founding member of the American Eugenics Society.
He likes eugenics if you didn't pick up on that.
Now in 1922 Harry Loughlin published a book titled
Eugenical Sterilization in the United States
which included a chapter titled Model Eugenical Sterilization Law.
This model law begins
an act to prevent the procreation of persons socially inadequate from defective inheritance
by authorizing and providing for the eugenical sterilization
of certain potential parents carrying degenerate hereditary qualities.
This law designates a socially inadequate person
as someone who fails chronically in comparison with normal persons
to maintain himself or herself
as a useful member of the organized social life of the state.
These socially inadequate people were not just the ill
but also for example the criminalistic, the inebriate and the dependent
including orphans, ne'er-do-wells, the homeless, tramps and paupers.
18 US states passed laws based upon Loughlin's model
and between them sterilized tens of thousands of people.
And in 1933 somewhere else passed a law which was based upon Loughlin's model.
The law for the prevention of hereditarily diseased offspring
which actually was slightly more moderate than what the model law proposed
if you can believe it.
This was of course Nazi Germany.
Loughlin was later awarded an honorary degree by the University of Heidelberg
for his work on behalf of the quote,
science of racial cleansing.
Loughlin was also an open Nazi party supporter
writing enthusiastically about Nazi Germany's eugenics laws
in a publication titled Eugenic News.
And why shouldn't he be excited about them?
I mean, he wrote them.
In addition to inspiring Nazi party policy
Loughlin also helped to disseminate their propaganda.
In 1936 he purchased an English translation of Erbcrank
and raised funds to have it shown in American high schools,
which it was.
That's right, just a couple of years before the Nazis
started systematically murdering people with disabilities
this Nazi eugenics movie was actually shown in American schools
and this event was reported on favorably in the Nazi press.
Loughlin raised the funds to distribute the film
by writing to Wycliffe Draper
who was another American eugenicist and racist
and importantly for Loughlin, a millionaire.
Together in 1937 Loughlin and Draper founded the Pioneer Fund
the purpose of which was to promote the genetic stock of people quote,
deemed to be descended predominantly from white persons
who settled in the original 13 states prior to the adoption of the constitution.
Now besides subjecting school children to Nazi propaganda
the Pioneer Fund set about supporting massive air quotes
research into race betterment
giving enormous grants to any researcher willing to push a pro-eugenics agenda
and here, dear video watchers, is where we rejoin the bell curve.
Richard Lin, you remember, the guy who thinks the single best study
of the quote, negroid intelligence was carried out under apartheid.
He's received over $600,000 from the Pioneer Fund
and currently, as in now, currently today, is the head of the Pioneer Fund
because it is still going and he is still alive.
Mankind Quarterly, the journal which published Lin's work
that is cited in the bell curve, is funded by the Pioneer Fund.
Mankind Quarterly includes among its founders Henry Garrett
an American psychologist who testified in favor of segregated schools
during Brown versus Board of Education
Corrado Gini, who was president of the Italian Genetics and Eugenics Society
in Fascist Italy
and Othmar Freiherr von Verschuer
who was director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute of Anthropology
Human Heredity and Eugenics in Nazi Germany
was a member of the Nazi Party
and, believe it or not, the mentor of Joseph Mengele.
Joseph Mengele, of course, being the physician at the Auschwitz concentration camp
infamous for performing human experimentation on the prisoners.
During World War II, Mengele provided Verschuer with human remains from Auschwitz
to use in his research into eugenics.
That is who founded Mankind Quarterly.
Editor of The New Republic, Charles Lane, writing about the bell curve in 1994
noted that five articles from the journal, that's Mankind Quarterly,
are actually cited in the bell curve's bibliography
but the influence on the book from scholars linked to Mankind Quarterly is more significant.
No fewer than 17 researchers cited in the bibliography of the bell curve
have contributed to Mankind Quarterly.
Ten are present or former editors or members of its editorial advisory board.
J. Philippe Rushton, the guy wandering around asking people how far they can ejaculate
he was president of the Pioneer Fund from 2002 to 2012
received hundreds of thousands of dollars from it
and he used Pioneer Funds to mail 40,000 copies of his book
Race, Evolution and Behavior to various social scientists.
Another Pioneer Fund recipient was American anthropologist Donald Swan.
Now in 1966, Donald Swan was arrested on charges of mail fraud.
When the police investigated Swan's apartment
they found an assortment of illegal weapons, a stash of racist literature,
Nazi memorabilia including flags and a helmet
and photographs of Swan with members of the American Nazi Party.
Oops.
Do you remember Linda Gottfriedsen, the author of the public statement
defending the bell curve's claims about intelligence
that I mentioned way back at the start of the video?
Well as of 1994, she'd received $267,000 from the Pioneer Fund.
And speaking of that public statement actually,
the Southern Poverty Law Center notes that more than 20 of the 52 signatories
were themselves Pioneer Fund recipients.
And crucially for us here, the Pioneer Fund wanted to fund Richard Herrnstein.
The head of the fund prior to J. Philippe Rushton was a lawyer called Harry F. Weyer
and in 1994, the year that the bell curve came out,
he told a journalist interviewing him that regarding Herrnstein
we'd have funded him at the drop of a hat but he never asked.
Now the fact that the bell curve includes among its sources
a bunch of people who receive money from the Nazi Fund
and publish papers in the Nazi journal
was understandably cause for concern for many when it was published
and this was used frequently to dismiss the book's arguments.
So Murray includes a very short defense of the Pioneer Fund
in his afterword to the bell curve which reads as follows.
The relationship between the founder of the Pioneer Fund and today's Pioneer Fund
is roughly analogous to that between Henry Ford and today's Ford Foundation.
So he's saying, you know, it may have been founded by pro-Nazi eugenicists
but today it's completely different.
The trouble is, Murray includes absolutely no evidence to back this statement up.
He treats it as a given.
But actually, the Pioneer Fund has been unwavering in its support for eugenics over the years.
Richard Lynn, the current head of the fund,
works with the explicitly white supremacist publication American Renaissance
and speaks at their conferences.
The white supremacist editor of American Renaissance, Jared Taylor,
who viewers of my other videos will remember, is funded by the Pioneer Fund.
So I don't buy Charles Murray just saying it has changed.
He doesn't give evidence for why he thinks that
and there is ample evidence against it.
Anyway, it's about time to wrap this video up with a few final thoughts, I think.
But let's first briefly summarize our main counter-arguments to the bell curve.
Firstly, the bell curve does not prove that genetics are the primary reason
for differences in intelligence.
The authors are not geneticists, they're a psychologist and a social scientist.
Their estimates of the importance of genes are based on suppositions and guesses.
After failing to make the case that IQ is genetic in origin,
they compare that IQ not to one's social background,
as the back cover of the book promises,
but a much more narrowly defined index of parental socioeconomic status,
which includes only a few of the relevant variables.
The main source of their data is more a test of academic achievement than intelligence
and since it did not return a normal bell curve distribution,
Hernstein and Murray manipulated the data
to exaggerate what were previously much smaller differences.
After a completely unnecessary section making the case for racial IQ differences,
they include a set of policy proposals,
most of which do not follow logically from their previous analysis
and some of which contradict it.
And of course, Hernstein and Murray's willingness to quote highly questionable data
from even more questionable sources should be very worrisome,
even if you happen to agree with them otherwise.
Having now read a lot of criticism of the bell curve,
I think I've identified a particular difficulty that people have in arguing against it.
And it's a tendency to argue with not the opinions that Hernstein and Murray claim to hold,
but the opinions that they would have to hold
in order to support the policy proposals which they do.
For example, it makes no sense to claim that IQ
explains only a tiny amount of the variance between people
and that you cannot know what someone will do from their IQ,
as Hernstein and Murray do,
and then move on to claim that IQ is one of the best ways
of determining an employee's individual productivity
and employers should pick applicants with the highest IQs.
A passing critic of the bell curve who hears this latter claim might then respond,
but that makes no sense.
IQ explains only a tiny amount of the variance between people.
You can't know what someone will do from their IQ.
To which defenders of the bell curve respond,
aha, you didn't read the book because they say that in there.
Now this gotcha tactic, as satisfying as it might be,
does not actually explain the contradiction, however.
This is the main rhetorical trick of the bell curve.
They pretend to concede to mainstream scientific opinion,
but then propose a set of conservative and eugenicist political policies
as if they hadn't.
Anyone who genuinely believed all the moderate hedging quotes
that Hernstein and Murray put in the bell curve
would not be able to propose the policies that they do.
So the critics of the bell curve see these policies
and start arguing against the opinions
that they assume Hernstein and Murray would therefore have to hold.
Thus the repeated defense of the bell curve
is that the authors can't be racist or biased or bigoted,
as their critics claim,
because in their book they say that they're not.
The critics must therefore have not read the book.
This is not the airtight defense they think it is.
We care about their political proposals,
not how moderate they pretended to be
in order to camouflage their approach to those political proposals.
One could, if one wanted, go through my video
and find corresponding quotes in the bell curve
for pretty much all of my counterarguments.
See, they also worry about the dangers of social engineering.
They also paraphrase Lewontin's thought experiment with the plants.
They also talk about the various problems with IQ testing.
They also call the existence of G arguable.
They say all this in the book,
so therefore they've addressed it
and your counterarguments are nullified, right?
The problem is, putting all that in the book
didn't stop them from advocating for the political policies that they do,
and it should have.
If, with regards to how much genes influence intelligence,
you spend a whole book saying things like
the state of knowledge does not permit a precise estimate,
but then you go on to propose a set of policies
that only make sense if intelligence is definitely primarily genetic in origin,
you are contradicting yourself.
You don't actually care that the state of knowledge
does not permit a precise estimate.
That apparently isn't going to stop you from acting as if it does.
I'm guilty myself of several times arguing against the point
that Herrnstein and Murray should have made
instead of the one that they did make.
Only a minute ago I said
the bell curve does not prove that genetics
are the primary reason for differences in intelligence,
to which the offense is, of course,
that they never set out to do such a thing.
But they should have.
If you don't prove that,
then the rest of the argument doesn't work.
Now, they couldn't have proved that if they wanted to, of course,
because the data is inconclusive.
Herrnstein and Murray acknowledged the data is inconclusive,
but then just keep on trucking,
assuming firstly that later genetics research will prove them correct,
which it hasn't.
The data is still inconclusive 25 years later.
And secondly, assuming that any data which trends against their position
is due to strictly temporary effects.
Rising IQ scores are thus explained away
as being due to an increase in test-taking ability or elsewhere,
as due to the data being distorted by the baby boom.
Rising standards of living can raise a country's average IQ,
but only to a point, it is assumed.
Black and white IQ scores are converging,
but they may be expected to stop,
and the gap could even begin to widen again.
So predicting the future on this issue is little more than guesswork at this point.
All the trends that contradict what the authors of the bell curve
would quite clearly like to be true are assumed to be time-limited.
You get the sense that Herrnstein and Murray are implying
that once we get to the end of history,
once things stop happening to make the data look like we're wrong,
then you'll see.
You'll all see.
In just a few more years, you'll see that we were right all along.
Of course, to a reader in 2019,
all this, as with much of the rest of the book,
comes off as rather quaint.
A relic of the 90s, maybe.
Like pogs.
You see, today, of course, we have social media
and daily get to see just how cognitively elite
the supposed cognitive elite are.
Herrnstein and Murray's theory of intellectual inequality
is, of course, just economic inequality with the license plates changed.
And I can think of no better illustration of this
than the college admissions bribery scandal from earlier this year.
This was a criminal conspiracy organized by William Rick Singer
to doctor exam results and bribe college officials
in order to ensure children of rich parents
get into several top universities.
Singer testified that he'd helped more than 750 families
get children into college this way,
and he furthermore claimed that some of the tactics he used to inflate test scores
were widespread outside of his particular scheme.
The problem, of course, is not that the rich are getting smarter,
it's that the rich are getting richer
and can increasingly rig the system to their own benefit.
The fact that the rich definitely aren't cognitively elite
is increasingly becoming a problem, thanks to our imbalanced economies.
In 2008, this cognitive elite caused an economic crash
and had to be bailed out by all the middle bell curve average people.
Lastly here, I'd like to say that the bell curve proves, if anything,
that any apprehension the scientific community might have
about discussing possible differences in racial cognitive ability
would be very well justified.
Because what you shouldn't want to happen,
as a scientist presenting inconclusive evidence for such,
is for someone hearing that inconclusive evidence
to then start using it as a justification
to propose eugenicist political policies.
The bell curve is all this in one package.
Inconclusive evidence and eugenicist politics.
The bell curve has stuck around not because it breaks new ground
or presents new ideas,
but because it is a useful pseudo-scientific justification
for conservatives looking to cut welfare programs
and racists looking to feel justified in their racism.
It is a scabrous piece of racial pornography.
Thanks for watching, folks.
This one took a bit of time to put together.
I'm sure you've noticed.
26,000 words, this is.
Thank you, as always, to my patrons for supporting me
so that I can keep making ridiculous videos like this one.
If you'd like to join this list of lovely people,
I will put a link in the video description below
that you can check out if you like.
And I'd like to give an extra thank you to my patrons this time
for fact-checking a previous draft of this video for me
and making some very useful suggestions.
This video would not be half as good as it is
without all of your excellent feedback,
so I am very grateful for that.
I'd also like to thank the people who were able to source
a few difficult-to-find studies for me.
Some folks were even kind enough to physically go and photograph
or scan things that were not available online,
so thank you so much for helping me out there.
Thank you also to the editors who helped me out with this video.
Your contributions and suggestions were fantastic.
Now, with any project of this length,
you inevitably end up with a lot of unused material at the end,
and there is so much that I left out here,
usually for time reasons,
because it would just take too long to explain,
or because it was too complicated and beyond my ability
to present the information in a way that made sense.
If you'd like to look into the various subjects mentioned today
in more depth than I do in the video,
I would recommend checking out the sources and reading list below.
Righty-ho, that's all from me today, folks.
I'll see you next time.
