Oh dear, part one of this video seems to have upset people on both sides of the political spectrum.
I'll take a look at their comments later in the video.
I'll also look at the Kyoto Protocol, explain cap and trade,
and answer more objections to the exciting new technologies being offered by the free market
to reduce CO2 emissions.
Like part one, this video will also be opinion, based on sources cited in the video description.
But after this, the channel will revert to its stated purpose
of checking facts and busting junk science in the media.
My premise in part one was pretty simple.
I came to the conclusion in my early 20s that a totally free society,
stripped of all government controls, is guided by this basic principle.
That everyone is free to do whatever he or she wants,
like start a pig farm or build a smelting plant,
as long as that doesn't conflict with someone else's freedom,
like drinking clean water or running a hotel.
So protection of people's environment, business and property
is a basic conservative and libertarian principle.
So how can so many conservatives now believe this is purely a left-wing issue?
Well, because that's what they've been told.
People who oppose technology and the human prosperity it brings with it
have been looking for any excuse to slow or even turn off the engine of the world.
In the 1980s, they found it.
Global warming.
Since then, environmentalists, the media and Hollywood
have worked to frighten the American people into accepting laws
that restrict access to energy and raise its price.
Fear of technology and an uncertain future created today's global warming movement.
I hate to let facts get in the way of a good story, but as we saw in part one,
it was a staunch conservative who first broadcast the message about climate change.
No government had taken the issue seriously
until Margaret Thatcher spread the message in a series of international speeches.
I spoke about the global threat of climate change.
Here's more from that speech describing Thatcher's vision of a conservative solution.
Until recently, we've always thought that whatever progress humanity makes,
our planet would stay much the same.
That may no longer be true.
The way we generate energy, the way we use land,
the way industry uses natural resources and disposes of waste,
the way our populations multiply,
those things taken together are new in the experience of the earth.
They threaten to change the atmosphere above us and the sea around us.
That is the scale of the global challenge.
We have to work to solve these problems on a sound scientific basis
so that our remedies will be effective.
So if you're an American conservative who accepts the science
but has been scared into believing that the only solution is Marxist world government.
They are about to impose a communist world government on the world.
Or even if you're just going along with the climate change is a hoax stuff
because you've been told it's the politically correct position you're supposed to hold,
then I hope this video will show otherwise.
So continuing on from part one,
let's look at more objections from people who call themselves conservatives.
In 1997, the biggest per capita emitters of carbon dioxide
agreed at Kyoto to get their CO2 emissions back to below 1990 levels by 2012.
Of the eligible countries, only the United States and Australia didn't sign up,
although Australia did so a few years later.
Campaigning by a fossil fuel industry lobby group called the Global Climate Coalition
and political organisations like the Heritage Foundation
convinced American politicians that such drastic cuts would be
economically devastating and risk the economic security of future generations.
A 1997 pamphlet by the Heritage Foundation aimed at members of Congress
claimed the Kyoto Protocol would
retired economic production every year,
result in a 3.3 trillion dollar loss of income between 2001 and 2020.
There are some who'd like for us to imagine a world without coal-based electricity.
Okay then, let's see what that would look like.
Without coal-based power plants, we wouldn't have reliable electricity.
Electricity prices would rise,
local communities would lose jobs,
and our national economy would suffer.
So yes, we can imagine a world without coal,
and it's a pretty scary place to be.
Three years later, the lobbying was aimed at President Bush.
Again, the Heritage Foundation warned of devastating economic consequences
if the US cut its carbon emissions in line with the Kyoto Protocol.
For the economy to keep growing, CO2 emissions would have to rise by 1.2% a year.
That would be around 34% above 1990 levels by 2010.
So the United States stayed out.
Everyone else went ahead anyway and tried to meet the reduction targets in two ways.
The first was carbon pricing, which lobbyists labelled a carbon tax.
It's based on the old established principle that the polluter pays,
whether it's pig waste, sulphur dioxide, or CO2.
If you want to say, but carbon dioxide isn't a pollutant, it's essential for life.
Carbon dioxide.
They call it pollution.
We call it life.
Well, so is calcium.
So is water.
That still doesn't give you the right to dump a load of cement in my backyard
or divert water from your property onto my property.
As long as you're putting something in the air, the water, or on land
that's adversely affecting my property and my environment,
then whether you want to call it pollution or an unwanted gift,
you're infringing on my freedom and my property rights.
I read a lot of comments from people who are scared of carbon pricing
without even understanding what it is or how it would affect them.
Carbon pricing is new and a bit mysterious.
But the term carbon tax, well, that's more snappy and more familiar.
Everyone understands what a tax is, right?
It means you have to pay money to the government.
Well, not quite.
I'm happy to use the term as long as people understand what it means.
When my adopted country, Australia, finally ratified the Kyoto Protocol in 2012,
it introduced carbon pricing.
We had it for two years until a new government repealed it.
So Australians know better than most what life is like
before, during and after the so-called carbon tax.
Before carbon pricing was introduced, of course we had some justified fears
along with the usual scare stories.
In a story titled Carbon Tax Backlash, one local newspaper reported a justified fear
that one of Australia's top 500 carbon emitters would be hit
with a $2.5 million Australian dollar carbon bill.
The meat rendering company AJ Bush & Sons used 24,000 tonnes of coal a year
to heat its furnaces and dryers and over a million gigajoules of electricity.
Its wastewater was sent to ponds where they emitted methane,
further increasing their carbon liability.
Altogether, the company was releasing 100,000 tonnes a year of CO2 equivalents.
The newspaper reported that manager David Kasulke slammed the proposed carbon tax
and opposition politicians later toured the company, pledging to repeal it.
Opposition leader Tony Abbott said the carbon tax would swing like a wrecking ball
through the Australian economy.
And there was a dire prediction from Australian lobby groups.
And for that, the Australian government wants to bring the economy to its knees.
Say no to the carbon tax.
Of course, what the anti-tax lobbyists didn't say was that companies could reduce
their carbon liability by making themselves more energy efficient.
And that's what happened.
I noticed that myself within a few days of carbon pricing being introduced.
Our local supermarket began covering its cold food section
with thermal curtains during the night.
It had the same effect as if you'd been keeping your fridge door open every night
and then decided to keep it closed.
It cut their electricity bill and it cut their CO2 emissions
and it cut their carbon tax bill and that was the whole idea.
As for A.J. Bush and Sons, eight months after carbon pricing was introduced,
the same local newspaper reported on the company again.
This time with the headline, carbon tax turnaround.
The company had sought technical advice to reduce its carbon emissions.
It covered the wastewater ponds and captured the methane it was releasing
and then used that methane as a fuel source.
As a result, it reduced the amount of coal it needed by half.
It replaced the old boilers with newer, more energy efficient ones.
It installed solar panels and cut its electricity bill in half.
According to the local newspaper report, the manager of the company now says
that the taxes had a positive impact on the business and made it more competitive.
Not everyone did well, of course.
Many companies that were already struggling financially collapsed
during that two year period, partly because of carbon pricing.
But economists said that the carbon tax wasn't as big a factor in these closures
as the high Australian dollar.
And here's where the terminology becomes a bit fuzzy,
because the money from the carbon tax was actually used to cut income tax
and give a direct cash refund to householders to compensate for higher electricity prices
and provide subsidies for energy saving devices that cut electricity bills even further.
I managed to cut my electricity bill by two thirds during that two year period
and that was on top of the income tax cut and the refund I received.
But was the Australian economy brought to its knees, as the lobbyists had predicted?
Did it swing like a wrecking ball through the Australian economy?
No. In fact, most businesses boomed.
The ASX 200, Australia's equivalent of the Dow Jones Index, soared and the economy grew.
Even opposition leader Tony Abbott had to admit it hadn't been the catastrophe he had predicted.
So why did he repeal it after he became Prime Minister in 2014?
Well, it wasn't because the carbon tax had swung like a wrecking ball through the Australian
economy. And it wasn't because carbon pricing didn't succeed in making Australia more energy
efficient and bringing down CO2 emissions. And it couldn't have been the way the money
from carbon pricing was redistributed to consumers because all Abbott had to do to
instigate a more conservative solution was use all the revenue to cut taxes.
The reason he repealed it was because it was a Labour Party policy that he had opposed from
the start and he had staked his political career on repealing it even before it went into effect.
Party politics always triumphs over practicality.
A measure of the success of carbon pricing is that after it had been repealed, farmers,
bankers and business leaders were all asking for it to be brought back.
Australia's biggest energy producer Woodside is now calling for a carbon price.
It's a major reversal from the company's stance from several years ago when it campaigned against
the Gillard Government's emissions pricing scheme. Momentum is building among big industry for a
price on emissions with both BHP and Rio Tinto speaking out in the past fortnight in support of
one. The system favoured by Europe was to set a cap on the amount of carbon that could be emitted
and then sell permits to companies that wanted to exceed those limits.
Again, that's not very different to the way other industrial emissions are dealt with.
In the United States, for example, companies have to buy licenses to release waste products
into the atmosphere or the water supply and they get fined if they exceed those limits.
If some companies reduced their emissions below the cap,
they'd get carbon credits that could be sold to companies that were over the limits.
It's a bit like my garbage bin. There's a cap on the amount of garbage a bin can hold
and if I exceed that the local council won't take the bin. I have to pay for commercial disposal.
But if my neighbour has space in his bin, he lets me put my excess garbage in there.
But what would happen if a whole street full of people started trading these empty spaces
in their bins? The ones who have more than a bin full of waste could pay to put it in the
bins that have less. That's a lot cheaper than having it disposed off commercially
and everybody wins unless you think the local government has no business collecting waste anyway
and we should be free to dump it wherever we like.
So now there's a financial incentive to reduce garbage.
Entrepreneurs could start coming up with recycling or waste reducing technology.
And that's exactly what's happening in carbon trading.
I visited a carbon trading room in Sydney and it was very little different to metal
trading or stock trading rooms. The carbon price fluctuated according to supply and demand.
As European companies became more energy efficient in response to carbon pricing,
they didn't need to buy so many permits. CO2 emissions fell so fast that many European
countries met the Kyoto Protocol target, falling to below 1990 levels.
And much to the critics' surprise, CO2 emissions in the USA also fell, dropping to just 2% above
1990 levels in 2012, the final year of the Kyoto commitment period. Even though the USA never
ratified the protocol, many states decided to comply anyway and energy efficiency technologies
promoted in Europe were also adopted by American industry. But remember all those dire warnings
that CO2 emissions had to keep rising by 1.2% a year? That reducing them by 34% would cause
living standards to fall 15%? Well, as it turned out, living standards didn't fall at all. They
rose. None of the scare stories about economic devastation turned out to be anywhere near the
reality. Not all conservatives in the United States were lobbying against cuts in CO2.
As in Australia, many business leaders and companies were pressing for compliance with
the Kyoto Protocol. This open letter urged the US government to strengthen CO2 reduction targets,
saying it would not only reduce environmental damage but at the same time spur economic growth,
create new jobs, increase energy security and drive technological innovation. Among the
signatories? Whoops, someone called Donald J Trump and his family. In the days before the acceptance
of science became politically incorrect among extremists, this was something even the most
hardened political foes could agree on. Hi, I'm Nancy Pelosi, lifelong Democrat and speaker of
the House. And I'm Newt Gingrich, lifelong Republican and I used to be speaker. We don't
always see eye to eye, do we Newt? No, but we do agree our country must take action to address
climate change. We need cleaner forms of energy and we need them fast. If enough of us demand
action from our leaders, we can spark the innovation we need. Go to wecansolveit.org.
Together we can do this. Yeah, sorry if you just had your lunch, but what a promising time that
was. I'd almost forgotten we're running through the list of objections. Objection number five.
People in the global South... Our coal-generated plants stop people from starving, so yes,
it's partly a reason. And it's certainly the case that making energy more expensive obviously
makes things more difficult for poor people. Well, certainly electricity and transport stops people
from starving because at the moment we need a huge amount of power to produce ammonium-based
fertilizers and to get food from farms to cities. But neither power source has to be based on coal.
In fact, coal-based power has been in decline in industrialized countries and no one's going
hungry because of it. As for being cheaper, well that depends on circumstances. If we look at where
most poor people live in developing countries, sometimes coal-fueled power is cheaper, sometimes
it's more expensive and not even available. Here are a few examples from first-hand experience.
Instead of motor pumps that need to be constantly repaired, maintained and fed with expensive
imported fossil fuels, some communities are turning to solar-powered electric pumps that
need little maintenance, rarely break down and cost very little to run. Remote villagers a long
way from the grid used to have to take batteries into town to be charged to run 12-volt fridges,
TVs and lights. Now they can use 12-volt mini-grids powered by solar panels. Other communities no
longer have to spend money maintaining and fixing generators and buying in diesel. They use solar
power. Millions of people now get their hot water from glass vacuum tubes invented by Huang Ming,
who I mentioned in part one. The tubes collect heat from the sun for free, doing away with the
daily chore of finding or buying wood and heating water on open fires. For some it's the first time
in their lives that they can bathe in hot water. These vacuum tubes can also be used for cooking.
The temperature inside gets as hot as an oven and can cook meat, vegetables or heat soup. A big one
can cook for several families. Again it means people no longer have to collect or pay money
for wood, which has been one of the main causes of forest denudation over the last few decades,
leading to mudslides and soil erosion. The diluteness problem is that, unlike coal or oil,
the sun and the wind don't deliver concentrated energy, which means you need a lot of additional
materials to produce a unit of energy. For solar power such materials can include highly purified
silicon, phosphorus, boron... But you need a lot of material to produce energy from fossil fuels too.
To build a coal-fired power station or an oil refinery you need iron and coking coal to make
the steel and nickel and aluminum and concrete and bricks and... Yes, all these materials also
have to be mined, refined and manufactured. And those industrial processes also take a lot of
energy. The advantage of solar and wind energy is that once it's up there it doesn't need a lot of
maintenance. By contrast, to keep a coal-fired power station going you need to continually dig
coal out of the ground and maintain the machinery that digs it out of the ground and transport it to
the power station and maintain the machines and infrastructure that transports it to the power
station. All of this takes resources and energy. But the best measure of how renewable energy makes
better use of resources is that it's already cheaper than coal-fired power in many places
and rapidly becoming even cheaper as economies of scale kick in and the technology improves.
Wind turbines are getting bigger and lighter. Solar panels are now being made so strong they
can support the weight of a car and so fluid you can fold them up or even paint them onto surfaces.
And let's not forget, wind and solar aren't the only forms of energy that don't add CO2 to the
atmosphere. The most obvious one is nuclear fission, which has been supplying France with
most of its power for decades. History has shown that nuclear power stations are much safer than
coal, as long as they're not run by Japanese companies. Then there are all the new technologies
whose impacts we haven't even begun to feel. New biofuels for transport are being developed,
not from sugars, specially grown in maize and sugarcane, but from cellulose, the stalks and
leaves and other by-products of crops that farmers discard. One of the technologies I've reported on
that best exemplifies the theme of these videos is a pilot plant in Taiwan that's taking waste
CO2 from a cement plant and using algae in sunlight to convert it into biofuel and astaxanthin.
Astaxanthin is an antioxidant and an expensive ingredient in cosmetics and food supplements,
so the pilot plant not only reduces CO2 emitted in the process of making cement,
which is one of the biggest emitters of carbon dioxide in the world,
you can make a profit out of it. I know that annoys some people, but like it or not,
making a solution profitable is the fastest way to get it adopted. Ask the public to sacrifice
their lifestyles or dig into their wallets for the sake of their fellow human beings,
and maybe a noble 5% of the population might do that. Make it profitable and everyone except the
most dim-witted will be on board. But I digress. Of course, coal and oil are more concentrated
forms of energy, and sometimes that's useful. In cars and planes, for example. But there's no
reason why renewable energy can't be concentrated also. In fact, it already is. As I showed in my
video Are Electric Cars Really Green, renewable energy can be concentrated in car batteries,
giving much better fuel mileage than gasoline cars. Renewable energy can also be converted
at source into hydrogen by electrolyzing water. Hydrogen cars already exist. Hydrogen-fuelled
machines can already do anything fossil fuel machines can do. A hydrogen-based electricity
grid could perform just as well as a coal-based one. The big difference is, burning hydrogen
doesn't produce CO2 or other unwanted byproducts, just water. So why hasn't it been adopted in a big
way? Well, it takes a lot of energy to make hydrogen from a plentiful source like seawater.
Using fossil fuels defeats the object of cutting carbon emissions. To get enough renewable energy
to do the job, you need a huge supply of reliable wind and solar energy. And the places you can get
that are usually a long way from populated areas where the hydrogen is needed. Hydrogen is a very
light gas, which means it's difficult and expensive to transport. But two recent breakthroughs have
changed all that. One is a method of adding nitrogen to hydrogen without the need for high
temperature and pressure, producing ammonia. Once you have ammonia, you basically have a safe liquid
transportation system for hydrogen. The other breakthrough is a method of converting that
ammonia back into hydrogen at the point where it's needed. So you can now produce ammonia wherever
you have three basic ingredients, water, nitrogen, and power. Water is abundant in the oceans,
nitrogen makes up most of the air, and solar power is plentiful in the deserts. Just to give an idea
of scale, how much desert you reckon would have to be covered with PV panels to satisfy the energy
needs of the entire world? Well, one researcher did a simple calculation, and the answer is just 1.2%
of the Sahara. That's about the size of the state of Gao in Mali. What this means is that our future
hydrogen energy map could look similar to the fossil fuel map, but instead of oil and gas
tankers heading to industrialized areas, there'd be ammonia tankers from Australia or Egypt,
filled with liquid renewable energy. Instead of pipelines taking oil from wells and shale beds,
we'd have pipelines taking ammonia from desert areas like Nevada or Texas. These are not my ideas,
these are proposals and projects now being tested by some of the world's largest multinational
companies. To those on the left who posted messages saying capitalism sucks, you're welcome to your
opinion. But these videos aren't trying to argue the merits of capitalism. Even if socialism had a
great track record on the environment, which it certainly doesn't, it's pointless suggesting that
the way American conservatives should address climate change is to stop being conservatives
and move to the left. That isn't going to happen. Like it or not, the United States is a capitalist
country, so as I said very clearly in part one, these videos are addressing conservatives who
accept the science and are looking for a way to tackle it through private enterprise. Because up
until now they've been told by extremists on both sides that any attempt to tackle climate change
is anti-capitalist. People who oppose technology and the human prosperity it brings with it
have been looking for any excuse to slow or even turn off the engine of the world.
So by staging demonstrations saying the only solution to climate change is to dismantle
capitalism, and by mixing calls for climate change action with other left-wing causes,
you're playing right into the hands of lobbyists who want to frighten people into believing that
anyone who accepts the science must be left-wing and want to bring down capitalism. I hope I've
shown that that clearly isn't the case. So to conservatives who do understand the science and
cringe at being associated with politicians who don't know how melting ice can raise sea levels...
Think about it, if your ice cube melts in your glass it doesn't overflow.
I feel your pain. But you have to stand up and be the voice of sanity rather than watch silently as
the remedial class still struggling to pass grade three science takes over. Because as voters become
more aware of the consequences of global warming and begin to understand the science and find that
their taxes are being raised to pay for hurricane compensation and they're paying higher taxes to
move infrastructure away from vulnerable coasts and they're being taxed to finance sea walls and
crop failures, they're not going to look for solutions from the political party that said...
I don't believe it. No, no, I don't believe it. They'll look for solutions from a political
party that's recognised the problem from the start. And contrary to the claims posted in
the forum of part one, of course conservatives accept regulations and incentives. It was a
staunch conservative, Richard Nixon, who set up the Environmental Protection Agency and signed
into law the National Environmental Policy Act, the Clean Air Act and instigated federal water
pollution control. Conservatives aren't in favour of no government, they want the minimum government
necessary to protect our rights and freedoms and private property. If you think you're a
conservative and you still don't understand that, then take a look at the National Republican
Party's policy platform issued in 2016. We affirm the inalienable rights of life, liberty and the
pursuit of happiness that government exists first and foremost to protect those inalienable rights.
In other words, no, you don't have the right to dump your pig waste in my water supply,
pollute my air and change my environment and if you do, the Republican Party says it's the
government's job to step in and stop it. How? Well, according to the Republican Party's platform,
we firmly believe environmental problems are best solved by giving incentives for human ingenuity
and the development of new technologies. Whether politicians are respecting these commitments or
are being totally hypocritical, well that's another matter. You have to decide whether you want to
follow them. If you want to support this channel, don't send money to me. I much prefer people
send money to a charity I list in the video description. So that concludes my foray into
the murky world of politics. We'll be back to dealing with misrepresentations of science
in the media from the next video. Thanks for watching.
