Welcome to the great nation of Holland, where the tulips grow, the windmills turn, the breakfast
is chocolatey, the people industrious and the sea tries to drown it all.
Except this country isn't Holland.
It's time for the difference between Holland, the Netherlands and a whole lot more.
The correct name for this tulip growing, windmill building, hagelslag eating, container ship
moving, ocean conquering nation is the Netherlands.
But confusion is understandable.
The general region has been renamed a lot over a thousand years including as the Dutch
Republic, the United States of Belgium and the Kingdom of Holland.
But it's not just history that makes this country's name confusing, because the Netherlands
is divided into 12 provinces.
Groningen, Trenta, Oferhessel, Helderland, Limburg, Nord, Brabant, Zeeland, which by
the way is the Zeeland that makes this Zeeland new, Friesland with adorable little hearts
on its flags, Flevoland, Utrecht and here's the confusion, Nord, North-Holland and Saude-South-Holland.
These provinces make calling the Netherlands Holland like calling the United States Dakota.
Though unlike the Dakotas, which are mostly empty, save for the occasional jackalope,
the two Hollands are the most populated provinces and have some of the biggest attractions like
Amsterdam and Kockenhof.
Chances are, if it's Dutch and you've heard of it, it's in one of the Hollands.
Even the government's travel website for the country is holland.com, officially because
it sounds friendlier but unofficially it's probably what people are actually searching
for.
Confusion continues because people who live in the Hollands are called Hollanders, but
all citizens of the Netherlands are called Dutch as is their language.
But in Dutch they say, Nederlands sprechened Nederlanders in Nederland, which sounds like
they'd rather we call them Netherlanders speaking Netherlandish.
Meanwhile next door in Germany they're Deutschesprechen Deutsch in Deutschland, which sounds like
they'd rather be called Dutch.
This linguistic confusion is why Americans call the Pennsylvania Dutch Dutch even though
they're Germans.
To review, this country is the Netherlands, it's people are Dutch and they speak Dutch.
There is no country called Holland but there are provinces of North and South Holland.
Got it?
Great because it's about to get more complicated.
The Netherlands is part of a kingdom with the same name, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
which is headed by the Dutch Royal Family.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands contains three more countries and to find them we must sail
from the icy North Sea to the Caribbean and Aruba, Currico and Saint Martin.
These are no territories but self-governing countries within the Kingdom of the Netherlands
and as such they have their own governments and their own currencies.
Geography geek side note here, while Aruba and Currico are islands, Saint Martin is just
the southern half of a tiny island also named Saint Martin, the other half of which is occupied
by France and also named Saint Martin.
So despite being separated by Belgium on the European map, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
and the French Republic share a border on the other side of the world on an island so
nice they named it thrice.
But why does the Kingdom of the Netherlands reach to the Caribbean anyway?
Because empire.
In the 1600s the Dutch, always looking to expand business, laid their hands on every
valuable port they could.
For a time America's east coast was New Netherland with its capital city of New Amsterdam.
There was New Zealand as mentioned previously and nearby the King of the Islands, New Holland.
Though the empire is gone these three Caribbean nations remain.
And while four countries in one kingdom isn't unheard of, it doesn't stop there because
the country of the Netherlands also extends its borders to the Caribbean and three more
islands.
Bonaire, Saint Eustatius and Saba.
These are not countries in a kingdom but are cities in the country of the Netherlands and
they look the part.
Residents of these far flung cities vote in elections with the Dutch government just as
any Hollander would.
Though weirdly they don't belong to any province and they don't use the Dutch currency of euros,
they use dollars instead.
Kind of like if Hawaii wasn't a state but technically part of the District of Columbia
all the while using yen.
These cities of the country of the Netherlands and these countries in the Kingdom of the
Netherlands are together known as the Dutch Caribbean.
And their citizens are Dutch citizens which, because the Kingdom of the Netherlands is
a member of the European Union, means that these Dutch Caribbeans are also Europeans.
So in the end there are six Caribbean islands.
Four countries, twelve provinces, two Hollands, two Netherlands and one Kingdom.
All Dutch.
