It's a favourite tactic of anyone who wants to undermine science,
compile a list of quotes usually from scientists
and usually taken out of context. Monckton does this of course
but he also goes a step further. If he doesn't think the quote is convincing
enough
he'll simply change it. One of the climate gate conspirators here
talking privately says there has been no global warming for a decade we cannot
explain why
it is a travesty that we can't. The first thing to be suspicious of if someone
throws a quote at you
is the lack of a source and very few Monckton quotes are properly sourced
which of course makes it harder to see whether they're real or imaginary.
Climate gate for example isn't a source
a date and an email reference would be a source but this one is fairly easy to
track down
because the East Anglia University emails are all listed on the net
and there's a search engine to locate particular emails and this is the famous
one from Trenberth that Monckton is referring to.
The exact quote is the fact is that we can't account for the lack of warming at
the moment
and it's a travesty that we can't. Now if this means the same thing
then why change it? Trenberth of course was referring to the energy budget.
Monckton thinks he should have been saying something more akin to a key
Monckton argument
about the lack of global warming for a decade so presto
Monckton changes the quote to make it comply. Of course it now means something
very different.
If you want to argue that it doesn't change the meaning at all
and it still means exactly the same thing then why change it?
Why not tell us what Trenberth actually wrote and let us make up our own minds
about the meaning?
This is a question I want you to bear in mind as we go through a list of other
fabricated quotes.
If this was an isolated case it could be regarded as a sloppy error
but it's part of a pattern of carefully changed and rearranged quotes
that pepper Monckton's presentations. Here's another one.
He said the Argeddon scenario that he depicts is not based on any
scientific
view. This is supposed to be a quote from Justice Burton
the judge who ruled on the use of Al Gore's film An Inconvenient Truth
in British schools. I was skeptical of this as soon as I heard it
because I was aware of the court case and this quote just didn't seem to fit
the judge's final ruling. So I checked a transcript of the summing up.
No surprise, Monckton had changed it. This is what the judge
actually said. It is common ground that if indeed Greenland melted it would
release this amount of water
but only after and over millennia so that the Armageddon scenario he predicts
in so far as it suggests that sea level rises of seven metres might occur in the
immediate future
is not in line with the scientific consensus. It's interesting to see what
Monckton doesn't like in a quote.
Monckton always questions whether there's a consensus on climate change
so he changes not in line with the scientific consensus
to not based on any scientific view. Now in his speech and this slide Monckton
does preface this misquote by pointing out the judge was referring to Gore's
claim of a 20-foot sea level rise
but that's not always the case. According to an interview with Climate Depot in
2009
Monckton said the judge was referring to Gore's entire movie
and this has inevitably been copied and pasted all over the internet.
Now I'm no fan of Al Gore's film. I've criticized it myself in an earlier video
and I agree with Monckton that it shouldn't be shown in schools
but I didn't need to misrepresent what the judge said
in order to rebut Gore's film. I just needed to state the facts.
An appalling admission which was compounded by an admission on the part
of the lead author of the subchapter in question
that he knew that figure was wrong but had left it in anyway
because he knew that the intergovernmental panel on climate change
wanted to influence governments and politicians.
So in other words once again an admission they were going to lie.
Monckton is referring to Dr. Murari Lal who wrote the report on Himalayan
glaciers for the IPCC.
The now famous catalogue of errors began when New Scientist interviewed
Said Haznain
lead author of a four-year study by the International Commission on Snow and Ice.
According to New Scientist Haznain's four-year study indicates that all the
glaciers in the central and eastern Himalayas
could disappear by 2035 at their present rate of decline.
New Scientist is now calling it a speculative comment
but it wasn't reported as a speculative comment
it was reported as the conclusion of a four-year study.
The World Wide Fund for Nature picked it up and Lal
incredible as it may sound got his information from the WWF.
In the Mail on Sunday story David Rose quoted Lal as saying
we knew the WWF report with the 2035 date was
grey literature which means material not published in a peer-reviewed journal
but it was never picked up by any of the authors in our working group
nor by any of the more than 500 external reviewers
by the governments to which it was sent or by the final IPCC review editors.
Moncton turned Lal's statement that he knew the 2035 figure wasn't peer-reviewed
into an admission by Lal that he knew the figure was wrong
but not even the Mail suggested any such thing.
Rose had to set the record straight later by saying he didn't accuse Lal of
knowingly publishing false information
This is Moncton's pure invention.
Now the first chairman of this intergovernmental panel on climate change
was Sir John Horton and he said
unless we announce disasters no one will listen.
There from the chairman of the organisation which is supposed to be giving us
unprejudiced science on climate change is a statement that
unless we announce disasters no one will listen, a statement that we are going to
reserve the right to ourselves
to exaggerate the science so that we can make
people listen to us. Sir John Houghton, whom you see there, the first
chairman of the science panel of the IPCC said unless we announce disasters
no one will listen. Moncton's most famous quote has an even more interesting history
he cites a book that Houghton wrote on the subject without saying what it was
but the thing about citing a source is that you actually have to have read the
source yourself
for example I don't have a copy of Houghton's book so I can't claim the quote
isn't in there
but I can cite a story in Britain's independent newspaper
saying that the Houghton quote was made up. It traced the quote back to a November
2006 column by Piers Ackerman
writing in Australia's Daily Telegraph and here it is
Ackerman does give the title of the book Global Warming
the complete briefing published in 1994 but it's obvious he never read it
and it's obvious Moncton never read it either because the independent checked
the book
and couldn't find the quote anywhere. On February 18th Ackerman decided that he
hadn't got the quote from Houghton's book at all
he'd got it from a Sunday Telegraph article dated September the 10th 1995
and here it is. And what was the quote? Unless we announce disasters no one will
listen?
No. What Houghton actually said was
if we want a good environmental policy in the future
we'll have to have a disaster and he explained exactly what he meant by that
it's like safety on public transport the only way humans will
act is if there's been an accident. Ackerman explained
how that remark came to be slightly paraphrased in the quotation sent to me
which you'll probably never know. That sort of thing occurs in the blogosphere
Well duh! Yes of course it does
that's why all these urban myths you read on the internet can't be trusted
but come on slightly changed according to Moncton the fake Houghton quote means
we're going to just make it up so as to scare you until you listen
so if this means the same thing as this
and this means the same thing as this then quotes aren't really quotes at all
they're just interpretations of what you think someone should have said
and can be changed over and over again. After the independent story was published
those who had been using the fabricated quote began backtracking
but of course not apologising or accepting responsibility for their
sloppy research
my favourite excuse came from Christopher Booker
another UK Telegraph contributor who said that he was
misled by the internet into assuming the quote was genuine
Yes! Damn that internet for confusing me and not letting me check a source properly
But at least Booker agreed to take the fake quote out of his book in the next edition
Moncton simply kept on using it and didn't change a word
He said unless we announce disasters no one will listen
or words to that effect. It came in a telegraph
Sunday Telegraph article about a dozen years ago. He now tries to deny that he
said anything like this
but in fact he did. No! He didn't
If you now know where this quote came from
and you now accept that it's inaccurate then you shouldn't keep on using it
however useful it may be in supporting your arguments
you should check the telegraph story for yourself and tell people what Houghton
actually said. In all his previous errors Moncton at least had the excuse that
he's not a scientist and he has no scientific training
so if he misunderstood and misrepresented the papers he was
supposedly reading it comes as no surprise but here he
should know better. Moncton has a diploma in journalism so
he would have learned that one of the first rules of good journalism is
you can't make up quotes or interpret what someone says or paraphrase what
they say and put quotation marks around it and
tell people they said it. Surely that must be obvious even to
people with no training in journalism? Apparently not. The most worrying thing
about these fabricated quotes is what I discovered in the comments
that followed Ackermann's article. Some posters didn't seem to mind at all
that they were being fed a fabrication. Peer's quote is correct.
Different words but the same meaning. Then why change the original?
Seems to be an accurate paraphrase to me but an accurate paraphrase is not the
same as a quote and an inaccurate paraphrase purporting
to be a quote is a fabrication. If the words are
different but have the same meaning then why not stick with the words that
were actually spoken? The only reason to change the quote even
with a verb tense or a preposition change
is that it does change the meaning. That's why people do it.
It's not only downright dishonest and a clear case of fabrication
it's also patronizing. Audiences shouldn't need to have quotes filtered
through to them by a process of interpretation and
re-wording by someone else. You can give your own opinion on a quote
that's fine or tell people what you think it means
but you can't change it or make it up. We're all capable of hearing a quote
uncensored and making up our own minds about what we think it means.
This is something Monckton preaches at nearly every presentation.
I'm going to take the approach of Fox News. We report,
you decide, I will give you a covenant that everything I say to you
is independently verifiable. There has been no
global warming for a decade. I'm just going to give it to you
straight. For the truth alone is worthy of our
entire devotion. And he said the Armageddon scenario that he depicts
is not based on any scientific view. What I am striving for here
is to reach the truth. The objective of science,
of economics and of politics is nothing less than the truth. An admission on the
part of the lead author of the sub-chapter in question
that he knew that figure was wrong. And before we subjugate
the truth to mere expediency, convenience or profit,
it is first desirable to discern the truth.
Unless we announce disasters, no one will listen. If you get the science
wrong and the policy wrong because you didn't
start with the truth, then people end up dead. You can check,
should you wish to do so, that I am not misleading you or
pushing you in any political or scientific
or economic or moral direction.
