The largest things in the universe are black holes. In contrast to things like
planets or stars, they have no physical size limit and can literally grow
endlessly. Although in reality, specific things need to happen to create
different kinds of black holes, from really tiny ones to the largest single
things in the universe. So how do black holes grow? And how large is the largest
of them all?
This video will not discuss how black holes work or how they form, since we've
looked at that in detail in our black hole and neutron star series. You can
check them out afterwards. For now, we're interested in finding the largest thing
in the universe. Let's start really, really small. Primordial black holes. The
smallest kind of black holes may or may not exist. If they do, they're probably
the oldest objects in the universe, older even than atoms. They would have formed
just after the Big Bang, when the universe was so dense with violent energy
that any tiny pocket that was just slightly more dense than its neighbors
could produce a black hole. The smallest primordial black hole that could still
be around would be a trillion kilograms or so, the mass of a big mountain. And yet
they would be no bigger than a proton. A primordial black hole with the mass of
Earth would barely be larger than a coin. This makes them very hard to find,
so we haven't actually observed any yet. If they exist, they may even be the
mysterious dark matter that holds galaxies together. Let's move on to the
kinds of black holes that we know for sure are out there. Stellar black holes.
To make a black hole, we need to compress enough matter so that it collapses into
itself. After that, the more mass we throw at it, the larger it becomes. In today's
universe, only the most violent cosmic events can create the necessary
conditions, such as the merger of neutron stars or when the core of a very massive
star collapses in a supernova. To have a unit to work with here, we'll use the
mass of our Sun, about 2 million trillion trillion kilograms. The smallest known
black hole has 2.7 times the mass of the Sun, which works out as a sphere
around 16 kilometers in diameter, large enough to cover Paris. Another
lightweight black hole is the companion to the V723 Mon red giant star. This star
is 24 times larger than our Sun, 30 million kilometers in diameter, and yet
it's thrown around by a tiny black hole just 17.2 kilometers wide. This tiny
thing bullying the star is so much smaller that we can barely even show
them in comparison. One of the largest known stellar black holes is M33 X7. It
currently spends its time eating a 70 solar mass blue giant bit by bit. As all
that stolen matter circles towards the black hole, like water going down a drain,
friction heats it up to temperatures high enough to shine 500,000 times
brighter than our Sun. And yet, X7 is only 15.65 solar masses and 92
kilometers wide, just big enough to cast a shadow on Corsica. To grow much larger,
black holes have to either devour a lot of stars, or better, merge with one
another. The instruments that make it possible to detect these mergers are
very new, so we're currently discovering a lot of exciting things, like two
massive black holes that we detected in a galaxy 17 billion light-years away. As
they spun around each other violently, they released more energy in the form of
gravitational waves than the combined light from all the stars in the Milky
Way in 4,400 years. The new black hole they formed is about the size of Germany
and is 142 solar masses. And here, we hit a curious gap in scale. There are lots of
black holes up to 150 solar masses, and then there's nothing for a long time,
until we suddenly hit black holes that are millions of times more massive, which
is a bit confusing, because we had this idea that black holes are consistently
growing and growing. But for the most massive black holes, this process is not
fast enough to explain their existence today. The universe is simply not old
enough for these supermassive black holes to have formed by eating stars and
merging with each other. Something else must have happened. To explain how we got
the largest black holes in the universe, we might need the largest stars that
ever existed, quasi-stars. To get a sense of scale, we can compare them to the
largest stars that exist today. Our Sun is like a grain of sand next to them. We
don't know if quasi-stars actually existed, but they're an interesting
concept when it comes to supercharging black hole development. The idea is that
the matter in the early universe was so dense that quasi-stars could grow to
thousands of times the mass of our Sun. The cause of these stars might have been
crushed by their own weight so much to actually collapse into black holes while
the star was still forming. In contrast to stars today that would destroy
themselves in the process, inside quasi-stars a deadly balance could
emerge. Gravity pressed the supermassive star together, feeding the black hole and
heating the material falling in to such a degree that the radiation pressure kept
the star stable. And so these quickly growing black holes might have been able
to consume the quasi-star for millions of years and grow far bigger than any
modern stellar black hole. Black holes several thousand times the mass of the
Sun and wider than the entire Earth. These black holes might have become the
seeds for supermassive black holes. So now we arrive at the kings of our
universe, the largest single bodies in existence. The centers of most galaxies
contain a supermassive black hole and they are monstrous. In the Milky Way we
have Sagittarius A*, a supermassive black hole with about 4 million solar
masses that is calm and collected and just does its thing. We know it sits
there because we can see a number of stars being thrown around by a seemingly
empty spot. And despite its incredible mass its radius is still only 17 times
our Sun. Smaller than most giant stars but millions of times more massive.
Because supermassive black holes are so massive and located at the center of
galaxies many people imagine them as being a bit like the Sun in the solar
system. An anchor that glues everything else together and forces it into an
orbit. But this is a misconception. While the Sun makes up 99.86% of all the mass
in the solar system supermassive black holes usually only have 0.001% of the
mass of their galaxy. The billions of stars in galaxies are not gravitationally
bound to them. Instead it's the gravitational effect of dark matter
which holds them together. Many supermassive black holes aren't gentle
giants especially when they're feeding on the clouds of mass in their galaxy.
The one at the center of the BL Lacerte galaxy is devouring so much
material that it produces jets of plasma accelerated to nearly the speed
of light. If Earth were orbiting this huge body it would seem 115 times larger
than our Sun in the sky and we'd be burnt to a crisp in seconds by its
glowing hot accretion disk. At this point black holes become so large that stars
seem ridiculously tiny compared to them. The galaxy Cygnus A has a supermassive
black hole with 2.5 billion solar masses and 14.7 billion kilometers wide which
would mean that if it took the place of our Sun it would swallow all the planets
and stretch halfway to the edge of our solar system. It's devouring so much mass
and material that it turns its disk into a kind of magnetic funnel spewing gas
out making tremendous radio lobes towering over the galaxy half a million
light years in diameter. That's two and a half milky ways wide. Another pretty
large supermassive black hole sits in the galaxy Messier 87. It has 6.5
billion solar masses and was the first black hole we got an actual photo of or
rather of the glowing gas around the edge of a menacing shadow. This sphere of
darkness is so large that it covers our entire solar system and yet there is a
scale even above these kinds of objects. Ultramassive black holes. Now we reach
the most massive black holes perhaps the largest single bodies that will ever
exist. These black holes have eaten so much that they've grown to tens of
billions of solar masses their gravity the engine for a quasar an accretion
disk shining brighter than thousands of galaxies full of stars. So massive that
they deserve a title of their own. Ultramassive black holes. The
ultramassive black hole at the center of galaxy oj 287 is 18 billion solar
masses. It's so big that it has a supermassive black hole nearly 40 times
larger than Sagittarius a star orbiting it. This thing defies imagination and is
really hard to compare to anything. It can comfortably fit three solar systems
side-by-side inside of it. Let's end this insane competition and get to the king
of kings. Ton 618 a black hole that we can observe consuming galaxies worth of
matter is shining with the brightness of a hundred trillion stars visible from
18 billion light-years away. It has an incredible 66 billion solar masses. A
black hole so large that it would take light a week to reach the singularity
after crossing the event horizon. About 11 solar systems could sit inside of it
side-by-side. It may very well be the largest single body in the universe but
in reality it's probably even larger. Since ton 618 is so far away we only see
what it looked like 10 billion years ago. In any case black holes are scary and
mysterious and gigantic. They'll be here after everything else dies and growing
larger and larger. Okay now let's do the trip again from the smallest possible
black hole all the way up to the largest.
let's try something new today we can call it behind the lies a short
behind-the-scenes bit about the necessary inaccuracies in this video
because it's not really actually possible to rank black holes like
trading cards how so well while we've catalogued millions of stars we really
only have good data on a couple of dozen black holes that's because black hole
gazing wasn't really a thing until 50 years ago and technically still isn't
because we can't see black holes we can only derive their properties from
studying their gravitational effects on the matter around them like the orbit of
stars that come close to them this effect depends on the mass of the black
hole which we can approximate at the most basic level with Kepler's laws but
this comes with huge uncertainties and error bars then we have to convert mass
to size next which brings new uncertainties for example we calculated
the radius from the mass using the Schwarzschild equation which for the
sake of simplicity assumes black holes are perfectly round and don't spin the
kind of black hole that doesn't really exist the reality is that physics on
these scales is a bit fuzzy so some of the black holes we talked about here
may be way smaller or way bigger we just don't know for sure we shim it around
this problem by comparing different sources with different kinds of values
and using different mass calculations to arrive at a standardized list that
allowed us to be as accurate as humanly possible you can look at all of this in
our source doc as a result this script was written with the tears of experts we
drove crazy with our obsession for the best values they could live with in this
process tons of stuff got cut and didn't make it into the final video but luckily
we found a way to not waste all of it we've created a lot of black hole merch
spanning the whole range from somewhat bonkers to more serious this way we get
to explore a topic from different angles and you get to continue having fun with
black holes after this video ends
