My correction of Suspicious Observer's video a couple of days ago really seems to have hit
a raw nerve. Ben Davidson, aka Suspicious Observers, came onto this channel calling me a liar,
saying he'd been misquoted, challenging me to a debate, and posting a video response attacking me
and the people who agreed with me, all in the space of a few hours.
But apparently Potholer54 misunderstood and he has thousands of very angry and foul-mouthed
commenters who are really mucking this up. I made a request to debate him but, as always,
he probably will not answer. Actually, I answered immediately, Ben.
I replied to your post within an hour of you posting your request. I even told you the time
that you can reach me at home and said any date after Tuesday would be fine. I also pinned my
response to your post so it wouldn't get buried. It's been three days now and I still haven't heard
back. There seems to be a fair bit of confusion about what actually was said.
No, there was no confusion at all about what was said, in other words what you said,
because I posted your video exactly as you made it. It appears that it's very possible that
there was either some selective editing or intentional lying about what was attempting
to be said. It appears it's very possible. Well, either there was selective editing or
there wasn't, and if there was, then by all means point it out. For the first half of my video,
I played your video exactly as you posted it, in chronological order and without a single change.
I didn't edit a second of it. I simply paused it to comment.
For the second half of my video, I only edited in order to skip to the parts you got wrong.
If you think these omissions change the context, tell us where.
Anyway, let's move on to Ben's actual rebuttal. We'll start by reminding ourselves of what he
said in his original video. The ice melts, the planet heats up,
the methane is released, and somehow every time we plunge into an ice age.
Ben's statement here suggests he's describing the start of a glaciation,
even though he mistakenly calls it an ice age. But he's also mixed in features of the end of
a glaciation, like melting ice and methane release. So if he's talking about the end
of a glaciation, then he made these mistakes.
And if he's talking about the end of an interglacial, then he made these mistakes.
Take your pick. In his response video, Ben gave a clue as to which one he's talking about.
We basically have this glacial cycle and I was talking about how,
you know, we have this ice melting and then we come out of the glacial cycle.
There. He's pointing to a part of the curve coming out of a glaciation.
So we now know which set of errors he made. This one.
He suggests that when the Earth comes out of a glaciation, it goes into an ice age,
by which he means a glaciation, because he uses both words interchangeably.
Which of course it doesn't. It goes into an interglacial, as I explained in my correction.
We should know, because when the last glaciation ended about 12,000 years ago,
we entered just such an interglacial and we're still in it now.
Researchers say it should last at least another 16,000 years.
Also in the original video he thought that at the end of a glaciation, ice accumulates at the poles.
I assumed Ben would correct this after I explained that it doesn't,
but in his response he simply repeated the error.
The ice accumulates up at the poles and it's basically concentrated up there.
As I already explained in my correction, ice thins and shrinks at the poles at the end of
a glaciation. Ben goes on to hint that either the ice migrated northwards from lower latitudes
and accumulated that way, in which case he'll need to show how the ice managed to do this,
or he hints that he accepts the conventional view that at the end of a glaciation most of
the ice sheets melted and all that was left was greatly reduced ice at the poles.
That's not accumulation, in which case why not simply correct it?
Ben did come close to grudgingly admitting that maybe this accumulation claim was a mistake,
but he quickly decides, nah, can't be me.
So one could see that one as being a mistake, maybe there's a language barrier, maybe he didn't
put it together since I was just talking about this and literally went to this in a matter of
the first minute of the video. I feel like that's... it's hard to believe somebody could
lose a train of thought in the first 60 seconds of a video, but it's possible.
Yeah, it turns out it's my fault for losing my... what did he say again? Anyway, whatever it was.
If there is a language barrier it's because I'm using scientific terminology where words like
glaciation, interglacial, glacial cycle and ice age have specific meanings. I get it Ben,
this isn't your field, but when you use these terms interchangeably it simply adds to your
already confused picture of what causes glacial cycles. And the word accumulate has a specific
meaning not just in science but in plain English. It means to acquire an increasing quantity,
as in the poles do not acquire an increasing quantity of ice at the end of a glaciation.
I never thought I'd say these words but take a tip from John Travolta.
Well that's the difference between you and me Harry. I say what I mean.
The other place where the deglaciation timeline comes unstuck is here.
I've got no idea what Ben means by cold spreads to low latitudes. Perhaps he's thinking of the
arctic vortex now hitting Europe and New England in winter. But since we now know he's talking
about the end of a glaciation, the fact is that the lower latitudes don't get colder,
they get warmer. The biogeographical and paleontological evidence couldn't be clearer.
So let me just put what I think Ben is trying to say in plain English, correcting his errors
and following a glaciological timeline that's well understood by researchers. If you agree with this
Ben, then this is what you should have written in the first place. If you don't agree, then great,
that can be the basis of our upcoming discussion. The debunking video of this video seemed to
suggest that I was saying the mainstream articles suggested an ice age was coming.
Actually I played the clip where you suggested this. You'd just been describing the process
by which the earth could be plunged into what you call an ice age, by which you mean a glaciation,
and then you say this. Just this month we learned that part of that process may include that extra
cold fresh water creating a stratification in the oceans. And as I pointed out, that's not part of
the process towards a glaciation, and the paper you cite makes no mention of that. Attempting to
make everyone think that I deliberately misled folks about these articles when I specifically
said that none of them individually believes an ice age is coming or anything other than global
warming. And in fact I played the clip where you say that. Here it is again. There's a bit of a
circular problem here where everyone is finding signals of cold but exclaiming that all the other
factors will overcome it to still warm the planet. Nobody is listening to the other group saying the
exact same thing. They are a net cooling factor, not a net heating factor in the
greenhouse sense. As I pointed out, the paper said nothing of the kind. You also claim clouds
have 100% albedo, which is simply not true. By the way, on Sunday someone pointed out an error
in my own video and I didn't make excuses and blame it on the inability of the poster to
understand or call him a liar or foul-mouthed. I checked what he told me and pinned a correction.
It really is as simple and unthreatening as that. So if you understand what leads us into
and out of glaciations, and this is all just a problem of my inability to comprehend English
or focus for more than 60 seconds, I'm happy to hear your explanations if and when we Skype.
But at the moment I'm still waiting for your response.
