My thanks to Tony Heller for checking my channel for accuracy
in his video Debunking the Debunker. A lot of people ask me to respond,
so I'm happy to do so. I'll go through his claims in chronological order.
Here's the first one. He claims that a tiny bit of cooling triggers ice ages
and a tiny bit of warming ends them. Well the researchers I cite conclude this,
not me. But he doesn't provide any evidence of the magnitude of these
changes. Actually I do. I not only give the figures, I cite and
show the study they came from. This is from my video Does CO2 Lead or
Lag Global Warming? A paper by Lorius et al shows that
insulation has varied by only 0.7 watts per square meter
over the last 160,000 years. In other words, the tiny amount of forcing due to
the Earth's orbit wasn't enough to defrost miles of thick
ice covering a large part of the planet. Listen carefully to what he says here.
But each time something had to act as that initial trigger.
Something had to nudge the round weight just a fraction.
A strong contender has always been regular cyclical deviation in the Earth's
position or orbit, changing the amount of sunlight the
Earth received. Whatever it was, in the depths of the ice
age this change melted a tiny part of the ice sheet
and released carbon gases from the soil and from the warmer oceans.
Whatever it was, he doesn't actually know what the trigger of the ice ages is, but
he claims to know that the magnitude of it is small.
But didn't I just explain what researchers think it was?
Tony even played the clip. A strong contender has always been regular
cyclical deviation in the Earth's position or orbit,
changing the amount of sunlight the Earth received. These orbital movements
and wobbles are called Milankovitch cycles.
In another video I explain that again. Researchers say carbon dioxide was not
the cause of the initial warming during any of the recent deglaciations.
The most likely trigger was the Milankovitch cycles,
changes in the Earth's tilt and orbit that caused more insulation.
What if the effect of those orbital cycles was actually very large?
Then his entire theory goes down the drain immediately. But as I point out,
researchers have calculated that they aren't large.
And again, it's not my theory. Professional researchers know very
precisely what these orbital variations are,
and they can calculate within given margins of error
how much they affect the energy budget of the Earth.
Of course, Tony can speculate that it's much bigger or much smaller.
He's free to imagine any figures he likes. But researchers can't do that.
They have to go with what the measurements and calculations show.
And as a science reporter, I can't do that either.
I have to accurately report their results.
Tony goes on to describe how a small amount of warming
causes oceans to release CO2, since carbon dioxide is less soluble at
higher water temperature. I explain exactly the same thing, so no
argument there. So the relationship here, as Potholler
correctly stated, is that CO2 follows temperature.
Temperature changes first, and the CO2 changes later.
What he blew over in his discussion was that Al Gore said the exact opposite.
He tried to make it sound like CO2 drove the temperature.
He did indeed, and I pointed out his mistake very clearly.
In his film An Inconvenient Truth, Al Gore used a graph like this to show a
correlation between carbon dioxide levels
and increased temperatures. But he obscured the fact that the carbon
dioxide increases lag the temperature increases by 800
years. So I didn't blow over this at all. It's
right there. Billions of school children around the
world have been lied to about this topic, and Potholler didn't seem to think that
was very important. Now that's a bit unfair. I think that's
extremely important, and if you'd asked me, Tony, I would have
been very happy to tell you that. I've made no indication in any of my
videos that I'm not concerned about children being misinformed about
science, whether it's by Al Gore or Laurie David
or anyone else. I've frequently spoken out in my videos
about the need to stop junk science creeping into classrooms,
and I'm happy to repeat that now. I've also said schools need to spend more
time teaching children how to tell the difference between real
science and junk science on the internet. But let's just get back to what Tony
claims I agree with. So the relationship here, as Potholler
correctly stated, is that CO2 follows temperature.
Temperature changes first, and the CO2 changes later.
Well I didn't say the relationship here is that CO2 follows temperature,
obviously, because this is a graph covering several glacial cycles.
What I said was that CO2 followed temperatures in the early stages of
deglaciation in the southern hemisphere, because I'm
reporting the conclusion of scientific studies.
In the latter stages of deglaciation shown on the graph,
and in the northern hemisphere, CO2 led temperature rise.
So just as it's wrong for Al Gore to give the impression that CO2 always
leads temperature changes, it's wrong for Tony to give the impression that CO2
always lags. If Tony's concerned that billions of
school children are being lied to about this topic,
and I don't doubt his sincerity, then I hope he'll join me in insisting that
school children should be told what the science says,
which is that carbon dioxide does both. It leads
and lags temperature at different stages in the glacial cycle.
Now let's go back and look at the ice core graph again.
The graph shows swings in temperature of about 10 degrees centigrade
during glacial cycles. These correspond with swings in carbon dioxide level in
the atmosphere of about 100 parts per million. Now
remember what Potholler said. He said that a very small change in
temperature causes feedback from carbon dioxide,
and that we get a 10 degree swing in temperature
from a 100 part per million change in CO2.
Does anyone remember me saying that we get a 10 degree swing in temperature
from a 100 part per million change in CO2?
No, because that would imply a ridiculously high figure for the Earth's
sensitivity, which is how much the Earth responds
to carbon dioxide forcing. Did Tony show a video clip of me saying
that? Of course not, because I never said any
such thing. And yet when Tony made that claim, some
people simply believed him without checking. That's why I got a
couple of rather abusive messages on my channel.
And that is completely ludicrous. It is, which is why I didn't say it.
Not even the most outrageous claims of climate sensitivity come anywhere close to that level.
I didn't say that, Tony. Okay, just to settle this, here's what I
did say about climate sensitivity. And these estimates show that for a
doubling of CO2 concentrations, we should see a rise in global
temperatures of between 2 and 4.5 degrees.
Now that's what I've reported, so what does Tony Heller say?
According to the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, climate sensitivity is somewhere
between 1.5 degrees centigrade and 4.5 degrees centigrade for a
doubling of CO2. So it turns out Tony agrees with my
reporting of the sensitivity estimates. There's a reason for the small half a
degree difference in the lower estimate, but this is essentially the same result.
So I didn't say that a 10 degree rise in temperature
came from a 100 part per million rise in CO2.
And certainly no study I've ever read has made such a claim,
or given that interpretation to the data used to make the graph.
Tony Heller assumed that that's what the graph shows, because he made a basic
error when he tried to interpret the graph for himself.
To find out what he got wrong, we first need to find out where he got this graph
from. Tony doesn't tell us because he
doesn't give his sources, so I had to track it down myself. It's
been passed around the internet a lot, but by searching the image and
screening the time it was first uploaded, I finally found the first posting of it
from a slideshow, and that led me to this slide presentation
at Harvard. The data for the graph, according to the
authors, came from this paper by Petit et al.
Reading Petit's paper, which gives us more detail about how the data were
gathered, it's clear that the temperature scale on
Tony's graph is not measuring average global temperature.
The authors measured oxygen isotopes in the air bubbles trapped in the ice,
which are good proxies for air temperatures. So,
as they explain in the study, they're measuring temperature at two places,
where the precipitation formed, in other words, where the snowflakes formed,
and where the snowflakes fell and were later compressed into ice.
To put it in even simpler terms, they weren't measuring global temperatures at
all. They were measuring Antarctic
temperatures. So, Tony's wrong to infer climate
sensitivity from this, because climate sensitivity is based on
average global temperatures, like the average global temperatures
Tony looked at when he cites the IPCC result.
I'm sure everyone understands the difference between these
average global temperature figures and these Antarctic temperature figures.
Under potholars feedback theory, not my theory mate, we would have expected that
as CO2 spiked, temperatures would have gone up too. Okay,
there's obviously a genuine belief that this is my theory,
so I'd better explain that the conclusion that post-glacial warming was
amplified by positive feedback is a well-accepted scientific principle.
Anyone with a passing interest in climate science would surely be aware
of the mountainous studies that have been written about it.
I've explained these positive feedback factors many times,
citing scientific studies. So, if anyone thinks it's my theory,
I'm very flattered, but I'm not nearly smart enough to have discovered it,
so please read these studies for yourselves. And it isn't a recent
phenomenon invented by fraudulent scientists.
Positive feedback as a forcing amplifier has been understood since at least 1969,
when Charles Keating of the Scripps Institute wrote about it.
This summary explains positive feedback very well,
published in 1979. So, to answer the question of whether temperature goes up,
after CO2 goes up, yes, researchers have shown that it clearly does.
What Tony is wondering is why, therefore, don't temperatures keep rising
when CO2 hits its peak? We would have expected that as CO2 spiked,
temperatures would have gone up too. Well, when something doesn't make any sense to
me, I don't assume that the science must be
wrong. I try to find out if professional researchers have an answer.
And of course they do. What researchers have found is that towards the end of
each deglaciation, the forcing stops and the Earth reaches
what's called equilibrium temperature. It enters an interglacial. Now, negative
forcing takes effect. The most likely reason for this change is
the Milankovitch cycles. As the southern hemisphere receives a
little less insulation, the oceans cool, dissolving more CO2,
which reduces CO2 concentration in the atmosphere.
And colder conditions create more ice, increasing albedo
and reflecting more sunlight. It's the reverse of what happens at the start of
a deglaciation. Look how quickly we come out of ice ages,
starting with very low levels of CO2. This is the exact opposite of what we'd
expect from CO2 theory. Of course, you only need to read the
published studies to see that these observations aren't the opposite.
They're completely consistent. To recap briefly,
the research shows that a small increase in insulation warms the oceans
and that causes CO2 to come out of solution.
Now, if CO2 wasn't a powerful greenhouse gas,
that would be the end of the line. Research has shown that the small
increase in insulation alone wouldn't be enough to melt all the ice
sheets. So there would be no way to explain how
each glaciation came to an end. But if CO2 is a powerful greenhouse gas,
then the result would be more warming, amplified by positive
feedback, bringing us quickly out of the glaciation.
So how can this process be the opposite of the theory that CO2 is a powerful
greenhouse gas when the entire sequence of events
depends on it? In 2004, the guy who's in charge of
temperature records at NASA, Gavin Schmidt, said
during recent decades, surface temperatures decreased significantly over
most of Antarctica. Let's remember now that we're talking
about Antarctic ice core records. Gavin Schmidt says the temperature is
going down as CO2 has spiked. Under pothole's feedback theory, not my
theory mate, you would have expected that as CO2 spiked,
temperatures would have gone up too. Okay, a lot of assumptions and
misunderstandings here. The problem seems to be that Tony's only
reading the abstract of the study on a NASA website.
He needs to read the paper itself, where the source of his misunderstanding is
revealed. In the paper itself, the authors show
that ozone depletion and greenhouse gases exacerbated a
phenomenon called the southern annular mode,
or the SAM, which defines the changing position of the southern wind belt.
According to the study, 90 percent of the cooling at South Pole and East
Antarctica stations correlated to the SAM, so their
conclusion was that recent cooling over the Antarctic
continental interior has likely been caused by both ozone
depletion and greenhouse gas increases. Now that's a clear distinction between
global warming now and global warming during deglaciations
of the past. Firstly, ozone depletion over Antarctica
is not something known to have occurred or been a factor at the end of each
deglaciation. Secondly, while greenhouse gases are the
initial forcing now, during deglaciation periods the
initial forcing was increased insulation, as other studies I've cited explain. And
the third difference, which wasn't in the Schindel and Schmidt paper but which has
been shown in other studies, is that during deglaciations the
initial forcing was insulation in the southern hemisphere,
much closer to Antarctica. Now the initial forcing is CO2 in the
northern hemisphere, much further away. So of course
Antarctica is responding differently. Not to mention the fact that 100 years is
a long period in terms of the warming we're experiencing now,
but a very short time period in terms of glacial cycles.
It's been understood for a long time that if the feedback is greater than the
signal, it will go out of control and there's no
way to stop it. He's claiming that the feedback is much
larger than the driver or a gain of much larger than one.
If that was true there would be no way to stop it once you start it down into
an ice age or just keep getting colder and colder until the whole Earth was
covered with ice and there'd be no way to get back out
of it. Well of course I'm not claiming this.
Researchers are claiming it and they've shown all their evidence in published
papers for Tony or anyone else to read and learn the scientific
explanation. I have to admit though I had exactly the
same question years ago when I started doing videos about this.
I would have agreed with Tony. It didn't make much sense to me.
But instead of assuming the science must be wrong and therefore it's
deliberately faked, I assumed that maybe these professional
researchers knew something I didn't. I always find that the easiest way to
get an answer when you don't know something
is to simply ask. So I asked some climatologists
and the answer turned out to be surprisingly easy.
Once the initial forcing stops, positive feedback has diminishing returns.
It's a bit like a child pushing himself on a swing.
He can go higher and higher as long as he's giving a bit of a kick with his
legs. But if he stops doing that and just sits
there, in other words the forcing stops, then the swing will keep swinging but
with a smaller and smaller amplitude each time
until it finally comes to a stop. On top of that a basic principle of
thermodynamics comes into effect which I've explained in my videos. The
positive feedback doesn't go on forever of course
because as the temperature of the earth rises it radiates more heat.
So once the initial forcing has stopped the temperature keeps rising
until the amount of heat leaving the earth balances the amount of heat coming
in. The earth then stabilises at a higher
temperature called the equilibrium temperature.
Another good question is what happens if the forcing doesn't stop?
What if it goes on forever? But of course every forcing eventually stops.
No flood basalt event which caused CO2 release in the past
goes on forever. Milankovitch cycles never go in one direction forever
that's why they're called cycles. So it's not a question of whether the
forcing will stop but obviously the longer the forcing goes
on the higher the final equilibrium temperature will be.
The off-sided claim that methane is a potent greenhouse gas
simply isn't true. Well that's very easy to check.
Just read the studies. Here's one that measured the spectral absorption of
methane and found that although methane overlaps water vapor
in the 3.3 micrometer band it fills windows in the spectrum in the
1.6 and 2.3 micrometer bands. Their measurements show that the
increase in methane concentration since 1750
has therefore led to a net radiative forcing of about
0.61 watts per square meter. Numerous other studies also contradict
Tony's belief that methane is not a greenhouse gas.
They show it has an estimated global warming potential of around 30 times
that of carbon dioxide. I checked back in the scientific
literature and this has been known for over four decades.
Methane is only two parts per million in the atmosphere. But as any scientist
will tell you just because something is small in
quantity doesn't mean it has a correspondingly small effect.
If you don't agree try ingesting just 0.06 percent of your body weight in
strychnine and see what effect that has. The layer
of ozone in the stratosphere makes up a tiny percentage of the gases in the
atmosphere but without it plants and animals would
fry under ultraviolet light. Scientists judge the efficacy of a
chemical by measuring the effect of a given
quantity not by assuming that because the quantity is small
it can't have any effect. And it's very unstable.
It oxidizes into carbon dioxide and water very quickly.
No, it takes 12 years for half of a given amount of methane to break down into
CO2 and water. So if a ton of methane is released then
as a rule of thumb half a ton will still be in the
atmosphere after 12 years. A quarter of a ton will still be there
after 24 years and so on. That's why the global warming
potential of methane is given according to the length of
time being measured. Again this isn't my theory. This is what
studies over the last 40 years have found.
There's no way to get a large buildup of methane in an atmosphere which contains
a significant amount of oxygen. It just can't happen.
And yet here it is. Not only does it happen
but researchers can measure it. The amount is increasing as human activity
and positive feedback produce more of it. The concentration has more than doubled
from 750 parts per billion in pre-industrial times
to around 1800 parts per billion today. So although it's not as long-lived as
carbon dioxide it's sticking around long enough to have
an increasing impact which is why so much research is being
done on its effects. Geologists are also estimating its
impact on past warming. So let's review everything Potholer did
wrong. Yes this should be fun and we'll put my responses in there to
sum up. First he made the baseless claim that whatever drives ice ages
is very small even though he didn't know what the mechanism was.
A strong contender has always been regular cyclical deviation in the Earth's
position or orbit changing the amount of sunlight the
Earth received. The most likely trigger was the Milankovitch cycles changes in
the Earth's tilt and orbit that caused more insulation. Then he stated the
outrageous claim that a huge amount of feedback on top of a tiny signal is what
was driving ice age descent and ascent. He didn't provide any
evidence for that. A paper by Laureus et al shows that
insulation has varied by only 0.7 watts per square meter
over the last 160,000 years. Climatologists agree that the amount of
forcing from the Earth's changing orbit, thought to be the initial trigger for
deglaciation, had nowhere near enough energy to thaw
ice covering a large portion of the planet.
And as I showed you the climate sensitivity that would be necessary for
that to occur is about 10 times higher than even the
most extreme IPCC estimates of climate sensitivity. But as we
saw Tony got that absurdly high sensitivity
by looking at a graph he got off the internet without checking the data it
came from and without noticing that these are
Antarctic temperatures, not global averages. And he then compared
that with actual sensitivity estimates which do use global averages. Then I
showed you using feedback theory that the feedback has to be smaller than the
signal. Otherwise the climate would be unstable
and Earth would either be like Venus or it'd be snowball Earth. But what you
didn't understand is that this would only be true as long as the forcing
continues. Once the forcing stops, positive feedback
has diminishing returns. In addition, outgoing energy rises as the
temperature of the Earth increases, bringing us to a higher equilibrium
temperature, as I explained in my videos. Then I showed you how his teeter-totter
diagram was unsupportable because it suddenly hit the ground and
stopped, but he never defined what the ground was. The basic laws of
physics tell us that the Earth will heat up in response to this extra energy
and the temperature will keep rising until the increased amount of energy
radiated out matches the amount coming in, what's
called equilibrium. The temperature will eventually
stabilize at a higher level. Then he made claims about methane which
are unsupportable. Well it's supported by 40 years of solid
scientific research and all the studies I've cited which
have measured methane's global warming potential,
its longevity and its increasing presence in the atmosphere.
And methane is very unstable. You can't build up
large amounts of methane in the atmosphere. And as direct measurements
clearly show, yes you can.
