So, we're at the last Barnes & Noble in Queens, the last one, and thank God because where
else are we going to go and take a look at what our competition is like?
Yeah, so this week we're going to do a little field trip where we check out our presumptions
on what young adult is now.
Because what's the point of going off and claiming all sorts of mad things about the
nature of young adult paranormal romance novels without actually investigating further?
Yes, without actually physically going and seeing what it's all about.
So, let's go laugh at the successful people.
This is funny to me.
I remember the first day I saw this and now it's just like, yeah, teen paranormal romance.
Here of course is Twilight with aliens.
Well Spring Chronicles unleashed werewolves.
There's a tiger one?
The last thing Kasey Hayes thought she'd be doing this summer was trying to break a 300
year old Indian curse with a mysterious white tiger named Wren.
I'm just going to assume that's a sexy ass tiger.
So she was battling immortal sea monkeys and trekking the jungles of India.
She fell in love with Wren, the 300 year old prince who's a tiger.
So we're tiger.
We're tiger.
But of course it uses the tiger by William Blake.
Tiger tiger burning bright in the forests of the night.
So five mythical Chinese dragons in the open sea beckon 19 year old Kelsey who must embark
on a third voyage.
It's time to find the goddess Durga's black pearl necklace and free her beloved Wren.
So this is a white chick doing a bunch of shit in India with Hindu stuff.
Sounds like.
Okay so here we have some books by Amanda Hawking who was the lady that got super famous
by self-publishing and making millions and millions of dollars.
First beastly teepee.
A beast not quite wolf or gorilla or dog but a horrible new creature with fangs, claws
and hair springing from every pore.
Yes the spell the one the witch in my English class cast on me.
I see Taylor Swift has gotten a young adult novel.
I see our buddy's getting in the young adult game.
This is new in the new teen, new teen, this is brand new.
So I'm really, I'm really digging these incredibly vague titles.
Rise.
An Eve novel.
Entice.
Vague noncommittal name.
Vague noncommittal name.
Another and another and another.
But they are adjectives.
They are adjectives.
Death, doom, and detention.
Possession.
The name didn't tell me anything but her makeup is incredible.
Fragile darkness.
Or should I say beautiful insanity.
Faded.
Thirst.
So basically if you want to title your novel just find a verb and put it in its past participle.
Rift.
Rise.
Rise.
And crave.
That's the thing I look at these titles and I think about who I was when I was in middle
school and high school and none of these titles would ever have caught my attention.
Yeah.
Possession.
Captivate.
Entice.
Endure.
Firelight.
Vanish.
Hidden.
See I just kind of feel like this one's taken.
Now we're in just normal romance because all this stems from here really.
And for an example we have, for the first time in print, a complete novel because you
are mine.
Is that another rich guy thing?
It's another rich guy thing.
Sexy.
Confident.
Commanding.
Anything he wanted he got and what he wanted was me.
Damien Stark.
I just want to like, let's focus on that.
Damien Stark.
I um, I see what you're doing.
Anything he wants.
Dominated by the billionaire.
I see what you did there.
I just want you to know.
I see what you did there.
Just kidding.
Okay, this has to be like for, this has to be for gay guys.
This cannot be for women.
There's no way that that is a straight man with that gun holster and no shirt.
Here we have the book Cinder or the Lunar Chronicles because these books are always
sagas or chronicles or epics or something of that nature.
And here we have humans and androids crowd the raucous streets of New Beijing.
It's a Cinderella story with androids.
Ghosts.
She shares her mirror every morning with a phantom teenage boy.
Oh, so Twilight with ghosts.
But the ghosts are gaining power.
This is like one of the partial sequins.
And the human race is all but extinct after a war of partials.
Engineered, organic beings identical to humans.
So the partials aren't humans?
Test tube babies aren't humans?
Yeah, so what I'm learning right now is that there's not a huge world of difference between
the adult section and the young adult section in terms of romance.
Except for the young adult has more like paranormal stuff.
And the adult has more like billionaire-ish and shit.
You know what?
I'm out.
I'm out.
I'm out.
I'm out.
I'm out.
I'm out.

