I'm the Angry Game Smasher and I'm here to speak truth to power and have opinions about
video games.
Hello friends and this time I'd like to talk about the recently released highly anticipated
game No Man's Sky.
The game is a variation on the Minecraft or Terraria style loot gathering and crafting
mechanics people have seen before, but with the central addition of an algorithmically
defined universe of incomprehensibly huge proportions populated with practically infinite
variations of flora and fauna.
In stark contrast to many space games which tend to feature lots of interactions with
aliens and epic space battles, No Man's Sky lives up to its name by using its massive
scale to tell a story surprisingly small in scope.
The bulk of your time is spent exploring the worlds you encounter which only you might
ever see, discovering and naming unique animals and waiting as your ship travels through the
vast unfathomable emptiness of space.
For me personally this generates a sense of ennui and humility previously consigned only
to obscure, poorly translated games from Russia and is an experience so rare for video games
that I fear many players may not have the capacity to even appreciate the attempt.
How can I tell you how polite I am if you won't take off your headphones?
We need to protect video games from people who did social studies!
Speaking of languages, the aliens you communicate with don't speak English and thus you have
to learn to communicate through sheer guesswork, or by slowly gleaning the translation of individual
words from artefacts hidden on various planets.
It's an exact replica of what it's like to try learning Danish.
Jake-kun-a-god-tain-kim-it-skovans-brigas!
Aliens speak in what amounts to English with a word filter over it, which seems initially
and unrealistic, but rather than attempting to populate an incredibly vast universe with
factions, characters and fully realized languages, Hello Games have made the thematically appropriate
decision to make the dialogue and interaction into an extension of the exploration mechanics,
where you generally know what you're going to encounter but the specifics are always
going to be just a little different!
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
I'm entitled to my own opinion, and that's the same thing as being right!
Deus Ex designer and human miracle war inspector once wrote that the theoretical best
game ever might take place in a relatively small, simple space which changes as a result
of your decisions over the course of the story!
No Man's Sky, by creating a gigantic universe but filling it with mundane and relatively
low-key mechanics, presents a facet of this philosophy from the opposite direction!
You're on a small personal journey where planets, languages, alien creatures and space
stations all start to feel ultimately meaningless, but which are constantly changing just enough
that while you're really on a small personal journey, the texture of the landscape is always
shifting and everything feels quirkily alien and yet recognizable!
But ultimately this small indie team has created a truly honest recreation of the intense vastness
of space by showing that everything is ultimately very similar and thesaurus mundane, I mean
commonplace!
There are doubtless many critics who will see this as a bad thing, as an objective mistake,
or as proof that they've been lied to by an evil developer, out to deprive them of
the mythical prelapsarian concept of fun!
I WILL NOT EVEN FUCKING BOTHER!
WE WERE FUCKING LIED TO!
But I fear I must politely disagree with their perspectives, because as someone who distanced
themselves from the inevitable marketing hype and managed to therefore experience the game
for what it actually is, I found myself falling in love with its particular kind of calm,
methodical pacing!
The kind that doesn't lend well to obnoxious, over-the-top, angry, cynical, platitude-ridden
videos that get that sweet, sweet YouTube ad revenue money flowing!
The moments of slow-paced idle wandering gave me time to fully immerse myself in the
feeling of being a space traveller!
Something I must admit I've never been made to feel before by a video game!
I felt lonely and adrift in an endless sea of stars and made to appreciate my smallness
in the face of the unending nihilistic DARKNESS OF THE COSMOS!
It reminded me of the year I spent dealing with insomnia by binge-reading Nietzsche and
Cormac McCarthy novels!
No Man's Sky forced me to meditate on the nature of my own existence in a way I've
never done with any video game, and it does this with its very precise use of simple mechanics
and relative emptiness other game critics are COMPLAINING ABOUT!
I have a sneaking suspicion that No Man's Sky is so perfectly designed to force moments
of introspection that gamers will be angry about it for forcing them to confront the
darkness within their own soul, what Georg Hegel referred to as the Night of the World!
Or as he would have put it, Das Nichts.
It's at once straightforward, massive, tiny, daunting, and enriching in a manner one might
be inclined to describe as spiritual.
However, the current expectations of space games is to be all singing all dancing experiences
of being an epic cybermarine who makes hashtag important decisions.
So I highly doubt too many people will approach this game with the good faith required to
make this game's interesting facets truly blossom forth.
The game footage you're seeing here was borrowed from streamers because I find it
intense personal fulfilment.
In the knowledge it is incredibly unlikely anyone will ever see the exact creatures I
did on the planet I visited.
If you're the sort of person who sees something gleeful in the knowledge that your experience
won't quite line up with anyone else's, I heartily recommend No Man's Sky to you,
sailor!
However, I cannot currently specifically recommend the PC version.
It may be my hardware, but the game was awfully laggy, and even when editing the .ini files
I found it was completely impossible to make my mouse sensitivity function properly.
Luckily I had played the game just little enough to refund it and revisit it in the
vastly more stable PS4 version.
Thank you for taking the time to watch this video and have a wonderful evening!
AHHHHHHHHH
weeks ago
This week I'd like to thank
Instant Grat
Jack Harvey
Jan Anders
Jason Walter
Jeffrey Theobald
Jenny Angel
Kaff Zile
Kav P
Kevin M. Knibby
M. K
Matthew Z. Miliani
Mitchell Reedman
Niels Abildgaard
Peter Brodersen
Rebecca Watsham
and Oliver Thiel whose name I pronounced wrong in a previous video
I genuinely apologize for this mistake
AHHHHHHHHHH
If you put trigger warnings at the beginning of your videos I'll fucking shit myself
Shit
Who's laughing now
