There have been a litany of complaints about the World Health Organisation in the popular
and social media, so in this video I'm going to fact check everything from the transmissibility
of the SARS-CoV-2 virus to the effectiveness of face masks. These are the most common complaints
laid out in blogs and newspapers and in a White House letter listing the reasons why
the United States was withdrawing itself and its funding from the WHO.
So let's start with the first complaint in the White House letter, that the WHO consistently
ignored credible reports of the virus spreading in Wuhan in early December 2019, or even earlier,
including reports from the Lancet Medical Journal.
Well, I couldn't find any reports of the virus in early December 2019 in the Lancet.
Even Richard Horton, the Lancet's editor-in-chief, says there's no such report.
Please let me correct the record, he tweeted, the Lancet did not publish any report in early
December 2019 about a virus spreading in Wuhan. Neither could I find any other reports of
a possible virus published in early December, and the letter doesn't cite any. So I turned
to a reputable source, the Congressional Research Service, to find out what reports the White
House is referring to. The CRS's role is to give information to
members of Congress on both sides of the aisle, so it has to be strictly factual and non-partisan.
But they couldn't find any reports prior to December 30th either. The CRS concluded that
the first publicly available reports of the outbreak were on a financial news website
called Yikai on December 31st, Beijing time. Yikai had learned about the outbreak from
this in-house notice sent to hospitals by the Wuhan Municipal Health Commission. The
Yikai report was picked up by several other Chinese websites, including Sina, and the
Sina report was picked up by the Programme for Monitoring Emerging Diseases, PROMED,
an open source platform in the USA. They translated it into English and posted it just three hours
after Yikai had broken the story. A few hours after that, the PROMED story was seen by the
WHO in Geneva. According to the CRS, the WHO contacted the
Chinese authorities the same day and asked for more details, in compliance with the international
health regulations that govern it. So the White House claim that the WHO ignored reports
in early December is false, and the claim that China's media highlighted a new virus
emerging in Wuhan between December 26th and December 30th is also false. The first publicly
available reports were media stories published on December 31st, Beijing time. If the White
House wants to insist that it does have knowledge of reports in early December, then these reports
are known only to the White House, and for some reason it failed to act on the information
at the time or pass it on, and it's unable to cite these reports today.
Let's hear the next claim from a couple of vloggers.
On December 31st, China notified the WHO that there was an issue. Taiwan did the same
thing on the same day with evidence of human-to-human transmission.
This seems to have originated with a claim from Taiwanese health officials, which were
widely reported. Health officials in Taipei say they alerted the WHO at the end of December
about the risk of human-to-human transmission of the new virus, but said its concerns were
not passed on to other countries. The Wall Street Journal took the Taiwanese at their
word. Taiwanese officials warned WHO on December 31st that they had seen evidence that the
virus could be transmitted human-to-human. And of course the claim was copied in the
list of reasons why the USA was withdrawing from the WHO. The WHO chose not to share any
of this critical information with the rest of the world.
But no-one thought to check the email from Taiwan to see if the internet chatter was
true. It's publicly available because Taiwan released a copy. Dated December 31st, it said,
news resources today indicate that at least seven atypical pneumonia cases were reported
in Wuhan China. Their health authorities replied to the media that the cases were
believed not SARS, however the samples are still under examination and cases have been
isolated for treatment. I would greatly appreciate it if you have relevant information to share
with us. So there was no warning of human-to-human transmission.
And where did Taiwan get its information? No, Taiwan explicitly said that its sources
were news resources published on December 31st and the response of the health authorities.
Those are exactly the same sources and the same information that the WHO had on the same
day. There was no critical information that wasn't already known. The email from Taiwan
was simply repeating what ProMed, the WHO and everyone else monitoring China had already
seen, including statements from the Chinese authorities saying that patients had been
put into isolation, which is a standard protocol for suspected infections. In a separate statement
about this timeline, the Taiwanese CDC made no mention of knowing about human-to-human
transmission in December or warning the WHO of human-to-human transmission. They say they
only thought they could be human-to-human transmission when they dispatched experts
to Wuhan in mid-January. By the way, this again dispels the claim that
the Chinese media were reporting a new virus in early December. Taiwan keeps a very close
track of Chinese media and yet, according to the Taiwanese government, it was only alerted
to reports about a possible virus at the same time as the WHO on December 31st. The first
public indication that they had been human-to-human transmission came on January 9th when the
WHO reported, according to Chinese authorities, the virus in question can cause severe illness
in some patients and does not transmit readily between people.
The information prompted the WHO to issue an immediate worldwide alert, saying the route
of transmission was unknown but suspected to be respiratory and that specimens should
be regarded as potentially infectious and that health authorities should assume that
this was a coronavirus with the potential for respiratory spread, in other words human-to-human
transmission. On January 14th, the Wuhan Municipal Health Commission issued a statement
saying there is no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission and that was also passed on by
the WHO. But the WHO omitted the next two lines of
the statement that would have clarified that. We cannot exclude the possibility of human-to-human
transmission, it said, but the risk of continued human-to-human transmission is low. The Chinese
statement was technically correct because there's no definition of the word clear,
but that made it vague and even misleading because it didn't tell the whole story.
As early as December 27th, Dr Zhang Jixiang saw three patients suffering from atypical
pneumonia at her hospital in Wuhan, a father, mother and son. In an interview given months
later with a Chinese magazine, Dr Zhang said she thought it's unlikely that all three
members of a family caught the same disease at the same time unless it's an infectious
disease. So a more informative statement from the Chinese
health authorities would have been that there is some evidence of limited human-to-human
transmission based on the small amount of data available but no clear evidence of sustained
human-to-human transmission. But as well as being obliged to pass on information from
the health authorities in an infected country, the WHO is also free to make its own evaluation.
Which it did, at a news conference the same day. The WHO's Acting Head of Emerging Diseases,
Maria Vanka Kovar, said, from the information that we have, it is possible that there is
limited human-to-human transmission potentially among families, but it's very clear right
now that we have no sustained human-to-human transmission.
According to NPR and the BBC, an anonymous WHO official told their reporters that Dr
Kerkova had been misunderstood. Whoever that official was, he was wrong. Kerkova's statement
was completely accurate based on the data available and very well understood by the
reporters in the room. The news went around the world.
The new coronavirus discovered in China may have had some limited spread among humans.
WHO says new coronavirus could spread, warns hospitals worldwide, world on alert for potential
spread of new SARS-like virus found in China, and so on in Turkey, Singapore, the United
States and elsewhere. In its critical op-ed, the Wall Street Journal
wrote, on January 22nd-23rd, a WHO emergency committee debated whether to declare COVID-19
a public health emergency of international concern. According to the Wall Street Journal,
it should have been an easy decision, despite Beijing's objections. The White House letter
makes the same complaint, claiming that China had put pressure on the WHO. Whether or not
there was pressure applied to the WHO, the decision to declare a public health emergency
is based on the advice of the WHO's International Health Response Committee. They're all independent
experts from different institutes in different countries outside the WHO. They met on January
22nd, but couldn't reach agreement, and deliberations continued into the 23rd. But even on that
second day, they were still evenly split. The explanation given is that while they all
agreed the outbreak should merit a scale-up of awareness, there wasn't a gradation of
warnings that they could call. There's no one-alarm fire or two-alarm fire. It's either
a five-alarm fire or nothing. Declaring a public health emergency of international
concern is a big step because it's the highest alert the WHO can give and triggers a number
of actions that have to be taken by member states. At the time of their meeting, the
city of Wuhan had been put in lockdown, so there was hope that the virus could be contained,
and there were only about 100 cases of coronavirus outside of China. So the committee agreed
a compromise, come back in a week and review the data again. Which they did. And by that
time the virus was clearly not being contained and a public health emergency of international
concern was declared. The question is, was the length of time taken to declare the emergency
unduly long? The designation of a public health emergency of international concern was only
developed in 2005 and has been invoked six times since then.
So let's look at two of the largest. The 2009 H1N1 virus was first reported by the WHO on
March 18th. It crossed into the United States on April 15th and a public health emergency
of international concern was declared on April 25th. That's a gap of just over a month.
The 2014 Ebola virus was first reported to the WHO on March 23rd. The WHO declared the
epidemic a public health emergency of international concern on August 8th. So that's a gap of
over four months. So in terms of time, the emergency declaration for coronavirus at
the end of January was relatively fast. But that could be a reflection of a faster spread.
So next I compared the severity of the two previous largest outbreaks. At the time the
international health emergency was declared on April 25th 2009, there were around 2,000
cases and 149 deaths from H1N1 in two countries. As for the 2014 Ebola outbreak, by the end
of July 27th, two weeks before the public health emergency was declared, there were
already 1,323 cases and 729 deaths spanning three countries.
So the severity of the coronavirus outbreak at the time of the first meeting on January
23rd was nowhere near as bad as for the previous two worse pandemics. A week later it was worse,
which is when a public health emergency was declared.
By the way, a lot of people, including whoever drafted the White House letter, seemed to
think that the WHO declared a pandemic. It didn't. It characterised the virus as a pandemic,
but there wasn't any practical or legal implication to that. The highest level of alert at the
WHO is the public health emergency of international concern, which it had already declared.
Of course, the WHO described this as a pandemic weeks after it fit the WHO's own definition
of a pandemic. It's just that calling it a pandemic didn't change anything. If any
government was ignoring the public health emergency of international concern and waiting
for the virus to be called a pandemic, then it was either ignorant of international health
protocols or completely incompetent.
The Wall Street Journal also took issue with the WHO praising China for its efforts. According
to the White House letter, this is one of the reasons given for defunding and leaving
the WHO.
On January 28th, after meeting with President Xi in Beijing, he praised the Chinese government
for its transparency with respect to the coronavirus, announcing that China had set a new standard
for outbreak control and bought the world time.
So did China deserve such effusive praise? From a human rights perspective, many civil
libertarians would say no. 60 million people were confined to their homes, there was mass
testing, and anyone who tested positive for the virus was forced into isolation. But from
an epidemiological perspective, the actions China took dealt with the virus very effectively.
Two huge hospitals were built from scratch, and a national travel ban slowed the spread.
Wuhan International Airport was shut down. Within a couple of months, most restrictions
had been lifted. Draconian as these actions were, the Chinese government did set a standard
for outbreak control. As the virus spread, most Western countries followed the Chinese
model of a national plan, mass testing, lockdown of hotspots, and mandatory mask wearing.
That doesn't mean these draconian measures were a good thing or a bad thing, or that
containing the virus at the expense of personal liberty and the economy was justified. That's
a matter of opinion. But from an epidemiological perspective, it worked and was widely copied.
In fact, the measures in China were so effective that the WHO wasn't the only voice of praise.
I spoke with President Xi and they're working very, very hard and I think it's going to
all work out fine. He loves his country and he's doing a very good job with a very, very
tough situation. But the issue of transparency is another matter.
Several people criticised me for saying in an earlier video that China was slow in getting
information out and underplayed the virus in its early stages. But examples of that
have been shown in this video as well as my previous two. Even the mayor of Wuhan agreed
that information release was slow. To their credit, the time between China suspecting
a new virus and completely shutting down a city of 10 million people was just three weeks,
which by international standards is remarkably fast. But there was a delay of about a week
in getting information out. There was a pattern of only making important announcements about
the virus after the news had been published in the media. The mayor of Wuhan blamed the
slow release of information on China's tightly controlled society and centralised decision
making. The WHO was well aware of this. In secret recordings obtained by the Associated
Press, officials at the WHO constantly expressed frustration at the slow pace of information
release. For example, China shared the genetic map of the virus with the WHO on January 12th,
which to give them credit was laudably fast. But according to the AP, that was more than
a week after the Chinese government labs had sequenced it, and ten days after Xi Zhengli
at the Wuhan Institute of Virology had sequenced it, according to a statement Xi made several
weeks later. None of this information was shared with the WHO. It was only when a Chinese
research consortium sequenced the virus and released its findings independent of the government
on January 9th that the Chinese authorities released theirs.
So while China might rightly deserve praise for quickly dealing with the virus, why did
the WHO praise it for transparency? According to the leaked recordings, the WHO felt that
criticising the Chinese government wouldn't be at all productive and could result in China
simply refusing to cooperate, for example by not releasing data or refusing to allow
the WHO experts into Wuhan to investigate. What the President's rationale was for praising
China's so-called transparency is a little less clear. China has been working very hard
to contain the coronavirus. The United States greatly appreciates their efforts and transparency.
It will all work out well. On January 12th, the WHO advised against the
application of international travel restrictions because of the new coronavirus. That was criticised
by many commentators and included in the White House letter giving reasons for the US withdrawal
from the WHO. You also praised China's strict domestic travel
restrictions but were inexplicably against my closing of the United States border or
the ban with respect to people coming from China. That's partly correct. The WHO lauded
domestic travel restrictions but advised against international travel restrictions.
From an epidemiological perspective, a virus can't distinguish between provincial and
international boundaries, so what works for one also works for the other.
But it wasn't inexplicable because the WHO did in fact explain the reason travel restrictions
don't stop the spread of a virus. Which is true, but they do slow it down. A study in
the journal Science found that the closure of Wuhan International Airport, for example,
cut case importations in other countries by 80%.
Up to that point, the complaint is correct. Unfortunately, the rest of the complaint needs
some fact checking. The United States border wasn't closed. Flights from China continued
because Americans living in China, Chinese residents in the USA and their families were
still allowed to travel freely. Several of those flights brought the first confirmed
coronavirus cases into the USA and international travel continued unchecked even from heavily
infected countries like Italy. In fact, nearly every country ignored the WHO's advice and
imposed travel restrictions and contrary to the White House claim, the WHO didn't criticise
the United States or any other country for taking these actions.
The White House letter complained that the WHO had downplayed the very serious risk of
asymptomatic spread, telling the world that COVID-19 does not transmit as efficiently
as influenza and that unlike influenza, this disease was not primarily driven by people
who are infected but not yet sick. Well, not quite. Let me just get the quote correct.
The director general of the WHO certainly did say COVID-19 does not transmit as efficiently
as influenza but he added, from the data we have so far. The second quote also had
the caveat that asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 did not appear to be the major drivers of
transmission. Leaving aside the misquotes, was what Tedros actually said correct? The
infectiousness of a virus is measured by the basic reproduction number or the R number.
This is an approximate figure for the average number of people each infected person will
A review paper published in mid February, more than two weeks before Tedros's speech,
found that the R number of SARS-CoV-2 in three separate studies averaged 2.44, 4.2 and 2.67.
Seasonal flu is between 0.9 and 2.1. In other words, SARS-CoV-2 is roughly twice as infectious
as seasonal flu. That evidence was available to Tedros at the time of his speech, so his
statement was incorrect. As for asymptomatic cases not seeming to be the major driver of
transmission, the fact is there was uncertainty as this research paper published just three
days after Tedros's speech shows. But there was also increasing evidence at the time of
the speech of asymptomatic cases spreading the virus. Even so, as late as June, Maria
Van Kerkhove was still saying that asymptomatic transmission was rare. The next day she corrected
her statement to explain that she was talking about a small subset of studies.
I got a few comments in an earlier video forum saying this.
What about WHO, an international body suggesting face masks don't work? Why would you follow
official medical advice when they lied about masks not working?
Well let's start as always by getting the facts straight. The WHO never said masks don't
work. Here's the earliest advice from the WHO given in January and it specifically says
that wearing a medical mask is one of the prevention measures to limit spread of certain
respiratory diseases, including 2019 ENCOV in affected areas. However, it then goes on
to explain that masks are only effective if they are properly worn, properly handled and
accompanied by other preventive measures, like hand washing.
Long before the outbreak of Covid-19, virologists had shown that masks do protect against water
droplets that carry the virus and even smaller particles called aerosols if the mask is a
type N95. The effectiveness in preventing the virus getting through in one study was
68% and 91% respectively. But viruses can also be spread by touching
contaminated surfaces or droplets getting into the eyes. So the effectiveness of masks
depends on proper hygiene. One Hong Kong study found that masks alone had little effect in
reducing the spread of influenza in a group that wore masks but didn't wash their hands.
Masks are even more effective in preventing infected people from spreading the virus.
This test shows droplets, they're visible in green, emanating from someone just talking
without a mask. But wearing a mask stops that completely.
So right from the start of the outbreak the WHO recommended the use of masks for people
with symptoms and healthcare workers because they do work. They didn't recommend it for
the general population at that time because the supply of masks was limited. That was
the same advice given by the CDC and the UK's Chief Medical Advisor for the same reasons.
As more masks became available and the asymptomatic spread of SARS-CoV-2 was discovered, the advice
changed. The claim that masks don't work isn't coming from the WHO, it's coming from people
who distrust or even ignore medical advice. If I hadn't been wearing a mask so much in
the last 10 days or so, I really wonder if I would have gotten it. But I know moving
the mask around, getting it just right, I'm bound to put some virus on the mask that I
sucked in. That's most likely what happened. With respect, sir, if your hand hygiene is
so bad that you think you're spreading the virus onto your mask by touching it, then
it's your filthy hands that are the cause of the problem, not the mask. Masks shouldn't
need constant adjustment anyway. So why are you... Oh, well, if you're going to dress
up like Jesse James, then it's not surprising you have to keep fiddling with this ridiculous
handkerchief tied round the back of your neck. If you want to know how a mask should be worn
and how to wash your hands, the WHO has a helpful guide.
Place the mask on your face, covering your nose, mouth and chin, making sure there are
no gaps between your face and the mask.
Not that, Jesse James. But obviously, no advice on how to wear a mask is going to be
effective if you willfully want to infect other people.
You spent $53, writes this lady. No mask. Only one in the store maskless. No one said
a word. Be brave. Try it. You'll like it.
Well, good for you if you think you're being brave by going into a supermarket without
a mask. But unless you're following hand washing protocols, the mask isn't so much to protect
you, but to protect other people from you if you're carrying the virus. It's a bit like
driving at 80 miles an hour through a busy school zone. You may think you're being brave
by risking your life at such high speeds, but in reality, you're more likely to kill
someone else. The problem is that in many parts of the United States, this isn't seen
as a medical issue, but a political one. Both of these people are members of Congress.
Can you take it up because I cannot hear you?
I'll just speak louder, sir.
Oh, OK. You want to be politically correct.
Why masks are effective and under what circumstances is not a matter of political correctness,
but scientific correctness. I don't know whether the person in this video is a fascist, a communist,
a Democrat or a Republican. Viruses work the same way for everyone. This gets us away from
the point that these complaints about the WHO are factually incorrect. But I thought
it was important not only to explain the WHO's true position on masks, but also why
and how mask wearing is effective, regardless of your political persuasion.
I've already looked at the false claim that Taiwan warned the WHO about human-to-human
transmission back in December. The criticism that the WHO doesn't have a normal relationship
with Taiwan is perfectly true. It doesn't. It can't even acknowledge the existence
of Taiwan as a country, leading to this embarrassing exchange.
Would the WHO consider Taiwan's membership?
At first, Dr Aylward pretended not to hear the question. Then he disconnected the link.
And when the interview resumed, he asked the interviewer to move on. It prompted these
comments in a YouTube forum. It's proof that the WHO has been bought by China or that Dr
Aylward is taking money for his stance, or that this is all some kind of conspiracy.
Actually, the reason Dr Aylward can't answer that question is fairly well known, and it's
been the subject of discussion for the last 40 years. It's not the WHO that gets to decide
whether Taiwan should be a member. It's up to member countries, including the United
States. The reason the WHO doesn't have a normal relationship with Taiwan is because
the United States and other nations, including Taiwan itself, have ruled that Taiwan as a
country doesn't exist. It's a province of China. So by international law, UN agencies,
including the WHO, aren't allowed to officially deal with it.
OK, I know we use the terms China and Taiwan as shorthand, but even Taiwan doesn't officially
call itself Taiwan. By mutual agreement and under international law, there's only one
country, but it has two rival claimants. There's the Republic of China with its government
in Taipei, and the People's Republic of China with its government in Beijing. Both agree
that Taiwan is just a province of their country. Several years ago I came face to face with
this bizarre situation personified when I met the Governor of Taiwan at a Kuomintang
Convention in Taipei. I asked him exactly what he does every day, and the short answer
is not much. Because there's only one country, every nation has to decide which of the two
governments to recognise. And since nearly every country, including the United States,
those churned in red, have now opted to recognise Beijing, it's the People's Republic of China
that occupies China's seat at the United Nations. That's why the USA doesn't have an official
embassy in Taiwan. It's represented by something called the American Institute. It's why
members of the WHO, including the United States when it was a member, have given China's seat
at the WHO to the People's Republic of China, not the Republic of China. It means the People's
Republic of China gets to decide on what terms the province of Taiwan participates in international
gatherings. The WHO can and does have regular unofficial contacts with Taiwan, but it can't
be officially recognised. Taiwan can't even compete in the Olympics or attend international
conferences or join international organisations like APEC under the name of Republic of China.
It has to participate as something called Chinese Taipei. I know, how dare I call Taiwan a province
of China? Well until Taiwan declares independence, which it shows no sign of doing because the
consequences would be far too bloody, both Taipei and Beijing do regard it as a province
of China, so you can't blame Dr Elwood either. He's lumbered with a system imposed on him
by the two Chinas and by members of the United Nations, including the United States, which
chose to recognise Beijing rather than Taipei. If critics want the WHO and other UN bodies
to give Taiwan official recognition, then they need to lobby the US government to switch
recognition from the People's Republic of China to the Republic of China and then get
a majority of UN members to do likewise. Perhaps having a normal relationship in a very abnormal
situation is more complicated than the op-ed writers of the Wall Street Journal and casual
posters on a YouTube video forum assume. It's a shame that the real shortcomings of the
WHO have been buried under an avalanche of false information, fabrications, misquotes
and misrepresentations, exemplified by the White House letter that seems to have been
based on internet myths compiled from blogs. Most of the factually based complaints against
the WHO come from within the scientific community. For example, in July 239 scientists openly
criticised the WHO for not recognising the potential of SARS-CoV-2 spread through aerosols,
in other words micro-droplets less than 5 micrometres in diameter. Some of the signatories
told the New York Times, the Infection Prevention and Control Committee in particular is bound
by a rigid and overly medicalised view of the scientific evidence, is slow and risk-averse
in updating its guidance and allows a few conservative voices to shout down dissent.
Another example, although this is just my opinion and therefore carries as much weight
as an empty thought bubble, the WHO's long-standing travel advice might have been fine for SARS
and MERS and even valid in the early stages of the novel coronavirus, but it wasn't appropriate
by February and should have been changed, especially since part of the rationale was
to prevent business disruption and adverse economic effects. That's not the WHO's job.
And while the WHO was perfectly right and obliged to pass on the information it received
from China, the message it gave was messy and uncoordinated. Its alert to hospitals
on January 5th was clear and concise and should have also gone out in a media release at the
same time. It wasn't reported by the media until nine days later when it was mentioned
at a news conference. The WHO should also have reported the January 14th statements
from the Chinese health authorities in full and Van Gogh-Kover's analysis should have
been included, not just given at the news conference. Fortunately, the media picked
up on the significance of what she said and made it their lead story. Why so many people
didn't know that the WHO had warned of the danger of human-to-human transmission on January
14th or alerted hospitals as far back as January 5th could be because they have their heads
buried in the blogs instead of simply listening to the evening news.
You may have had some limited spread among humans. That's the latest from the World Health
Organisation. When I investigated the WHO's stance on asymptomatic transmissibility and
the reproduction rate, I was surprised to find at least two papers with a high number
of citations that the WHO had apparently overlooked. These problems may be the result
of the WHO's bureaucratic protocols, but that's fixable. None of the world's health authorities
or even the scientists who are sometimes critical of the WHO advocates defunding it because
the work it does in monitoring disease and improving the health of millions of people
is invaluable. And that's especially true in the middle of a pandemic.
If the US administration is concerned about the increasing influence of China at the WHO,
then it should have done what China did and taken active role in the organisation. Instead,
the US seat on the executive board was left unfilled for three long years. It was only
in March this year that the President finally appointed a US representative to fill the
seat, just a few weeks before its withdrawal. And ironically, by withdrawing from the WHO,
the United States is now ensuring the very outcome it wants to prevent. The US withdrawal
is leaving the field wide open to China. I realise that by presenting facts in this video
I'm up against human nature. People tend to believe the first thing they read or hear,
and with so much disinformation on the internet, it's then very hard for them to change their
minds – even when presented with the facts in black and white, which they can read for
themselves.
So before you comment with the usual unsupported cries of, this is all bullshit, take a look
again at the facts, and by all means check them. If you want to maintain that Taiwan
warned about human-to-human transmission, or that the Lancet or anyone else published
an article about the virus in early December, or that the WHO said somewhere that masks
don't work, by all means cite these articles and documents and let everyone read them.
Don't just point to a blog that tells you these things happened and expect everyone
else to share your faith. And if you think it's wrong that Taiwan isn't allowed to
fully participate in United Nations organisations, and I wholeheartedly agree, then instead of
blaming the WHO for a situation not of its making, tell us your solution. Should the
Taiwanese government drop the One China policy and declare independence? Should the United
States switch recognition from Beijing to Taipei? Let's see what workable ideas you
come up with.
If you think the WHO shouldn't have to flatter countries in order to gain access to crucial
medical information, let's hear your solution. Should the WHO be given powers to subpoena
doctors and medical records from a country? Should it have the power to forcibly send
in health specialists even if the host country doesn't want them there? And what should
be the consequences if the target country refuses? Bomb them? I'm really looking forward
to your solutions rather than just the usual mindless criticism.
If you'd like to support this channel, please don't send money to me. My videos are free
and my channel isn't monetised, so if you'd like to donate and encourage me to spend the
time and effort it takes to check all this information, please send the money to a very
worthy and unique charity that I endorse, listed in the video description. Thanks.
