Hello, internet.
So I think this is the part where I'm supposed to have a dramatic opening.
Perhaps the 2001 theme song playing in the background as the number one million slowly
fades into view, but obviously that's not happening.
Don't get me wrong, I'm lucky that so many people want to watch my videos, it's just
that one million subscribers is a number too large to be comprehended with a monkey-derived
brain.
To try and have it feel more real, I've taken some YouTube data and made a spreadsheet.
You can select your country and enter the population of the city where you live and
it will spit out the statistically approximate number of people in that city who are subscribed
to this channel.
Doing that for London shows there are about 9,000 people in the city who are subscribers.
Now, 9,000 is obviously a smaller number than one million, but it's a number with constraints
and is small enough to be partially understood while still large enough to be very intimidating.
If you're interested, you can click here to play around with the spreadsheet.
Now, as promised, on to the Q&A.
What do you like most about being a YouTuber?
The best thing about this strange new world is the people I've met, which is quite the
statement for a social recluse to make.
All these guys are amazing to talk with and I feel very lucky that I get the occasional
chance to do so.
What's the biggest change of opinion you've had?
That's a little too personal to share with, say, one million people, but I do want to
talk about the importance of being able to change your mind in general.
The trick is to keep your identity separate from your opinions.
They are objects in a box you carry with you and should be easily replaceable if it turns
out they're no good.
If you think that the opinions in the box are who you are, then you'll cling to them
despite any evidence to the contrary.
Bottom line, if you want to always be right, you need to always be prepared to change your
mind.
Were you trying to create a unique aesthetic by using stick figures?
No, it's just that I can't draw.
After moving to London, how long did it take until you stopped saying math and started
saying maths?
I haven't.
I'm sticking with math.
Americans in the UK often end up with an unfortunate accent I call pseudo-British.
I try very hard to avoid this, but when you've spent the majority of your talking time with
British people over a decade, it's impossible to completely fight the creeping pseudo-British
accent no matter how abhorrent you think it makes you sound.
Did your students know about your YouTube channel?
I would never talk about it, but I know some of them knew.
However, it's impossible to express how little they cared.
My classes were not like hour-long CGP Grey videos.
Would you like to see the interrobang more widely adopted?
Who wouldn't?
Why don't you have an upload schedule?
Right, the big question, usually phrased in the YouTube comment section as, why you no
make more vids.
So on average, over the past couple years, I've posted a Grey Explains video about every
five weeks, which means if I could switch to a weekly schedule, my income would quintuple.
Trust me, I would if I could.
I've talked before about how long it takes to make these videos, but one of the other
problems I haven't mentioned is the failure rate of projects.
For every video you see, there's at least three or four that didn't make it.
Most of the time, that's just a lost afternoon working on an idea before realizing it's a
dud, but sometimes it's weeks before a fatal flaw reveals itself.
Sometimes I'll discover too late that a central fact of the video isn't correct or sometimes
the whole script is just unfixably boring.
Either way, the decision to kill a video that isn't working is depressing and frustrating
because of the sunk cost of all those hours.
The videos you see are mostly pretty good precisely because I try my best to kill the
ones that weren't.
That's why there isn't a schedule and there never can be.
What's the biggest video you killed?
The most time I ever lost was on a very important video to convince the world why Settlers of
Catan is the greatest board game ever made.
I had a couple thousand words as a starting point, harassed some people for footage of
a now-famous game that took place at YouTube EDU, got a bunch of random videos from my
ever-helpful Twitter followers and had an outline for a how-to-play Settlers of Catan
tutorial for my second channel.
But the script kept growing and growing and began to look more like a documentary film
on board game design than a YouTube video which might, depending on who you are, sound
really interesting but it had the boring problem I mentioned before.
My last-ditch effort to save a project like this is to get rid of everything, work on
something else for a little while and then write a brand new script by hand which I did.
But that script still wasn't good and weeks after starting the project I had to shelve
it.
But I'm still talking about it because it's an idea that I just can't let go and might
come back to someday.
Why don't you hire people to help you?
That's a big topic that deserves its own video but for now let me just say the kind of work
produced by individuals is very different than the kind of work produced by groups.
One isn't intrinsically better than the other but I think the kinds of videos I've made
have all benefited from being a one-man project from start to finish.
Your opinion on koalas.
They sleep 20 hours a day, never going to be a koala-based civilization with that kind
of work ethic.
If you could transfer your brain into a robotic body, would you?
Obviously yes.
You can add three amendments to the US Constitution.
What do they do?
Oh, so many tempting changes to make.
Off the top of my head I'd say, first, abolish private funding of all elections and instead
make them run from a limited pool of tax money, second, abolish the Senate and replace it
with some kind of proportional body, and third, overturn the interstate commerce clause
which basically gives the federal government a little too much power over the affairs of
the states.
Of course, if it was actually my responsibility to change three things, I'd consult with some
experts rather than just idly mull it over for a couple days.
What advice would you give for a successful life?
Build a self-evaluation loop into your life.
If you don't periodically review your actions and how they've turned out and your decision-making
process then there's no hope for your life to improve other than just by random chance.
I do very small weekly reviews and bigger quarterly and yearly reviews of how my life
is going and how I might want it to be different in both the biggest and smallest ways and
what actions I need to take to try and achieve that.
That's the best high-level advice I have.
For more tactical advice I recommend two books, one that changed my life, Getting Things Done
by David Allen, and another that might change yours, So Good They Can't Ignore You by Cal
Newport.
You can click these books to read my reviews of them.
Have you made a video you didn't like how it came out?
With the possible exception of the 2012 and Holland videos, I'm unhappy with all of them.
I don't watch my videos after upload if I can possibly avoid it.
To me, each is a graveyard of the could-have-been.
Favorite non-educational YouTube channels?
First, Glove and Boots, who I'm surprised haven't yet gotten all the subscribers, and
second, I'm a huge fan of Yahtzee, the Roger Ebert of video game reviews.
What was your first memory of the internet?
Mine is playing Flash games.
Mine is BBSs.
Now get off my lawn and go watch this documentary, you whippersnapper.
Who are your heroes?
Mostly Dark Seer and Necrolite.
What do you find hardest when making a video?
Writing the script is the hardest and it's unfortunately the bottleneck for the whole
process.
The most uncomfortable part is editing the audio.
Just like everyone else, there's a voice in my head that I like and a voice on the tape
that I don't.
Have any of your answers from the previous Q&A changed?
You're probably referring to these and no.
How long would you survive a zombie apocalypse?
I wouldn't.
The Walking Dead-style zombie apocalypse arises, the correct course of action is clearly suicide.
What do you listen to while making videos?
My most reliable writing music is Girl Talks All Day, which I would link to on YouTube
but it's copyright infringement-tastic.
You can get it from his website and if you like remixes, you should give it a listen.
However, I often get some random terrible song in my head while writing and end up buying
it and putting it on repeat for hours.
For this script, my iTunes reveals I listen to a single song 127 times and while that
might be torture in some jurisdictions, the repetitiveness really zones me into writing.
Animating, however, is incredibly tedious so I listen to a ton of audiobooks and podcasts
to keep my sanity.
What's the most interesting could-have-been of history?
Historical could-have-beens mostly strike me as a missing-the-point thought exercise.
The real driver of history is neither great men nor the actions of the masses but the
ceaseless march of science and technology which is mostly indifferent to the imaginary
lines drawn by packs of monkeys.
Knowing my perspective, you'll see why if I had to pick one, it would be this primitive
Greek steam engine invented 2,000 years ago.
There are reasons why it wasn't developed further but if some rich Greek had gotten
obsessed with the technology, perhaps we would have had an industrial revolution two millennia
earlier and we'd now be a transgalactic post-singularity civilization with robot bodies.
What's the most British thing you've encountered that you can't get your head around?
The idea that the best way to cool down on a hot summer day while confined to a non-air-conditioned
office is to drink hot tea.
Madness.
Absolute madness.
Should we create a universal language?
We already have, it's just not very universal.
What question do you want me to ask the most?
Hmm.
I love your videos and have even watched this somewhat tedious one until the very end.
How can I help support you?
I'm glad you asked, Gregorianhawk.
The best way is through a subscription at Subbable where you can get signed posters
and other stuff and there's also t-shirts and addiction mugs and flamethrowers over
at DFTBA.
Well, Internet, it's been fun and I'm sorry if your question didn't make it into this
video there were loads I had to cut but now that we're in this realm of numbers so big
they don't make sense, perhaps I'll turn Q&As into an occasional random thing rather than
a waiting for an arbitrary base 10 rollover thing.
Thank you again to everyone for your continued support and thank you for subscribing and
watching.
The last two years have been quite a ride.
