Welcome to Sunday Brunch.
Yes, the Sunday Brunch edition of Booze Your Own Adventure, where we'll actually be adventuring,
which we haven't been doing for a little while.
Yeah.
So what are we drinking today, Nella?
Well, because it's Sunday, we're just going to go classic brunch with some Bellinis, which
is peach nectar and sparkling white wine.
And so we're going to be talking about the outline this week, but next week we are going
to have our guest author.
Her name is Lindsay Rebar, and she is the author of The Art of Wishing and The Fourth
Wish.
It's about genies.
So if you want to join us in our discussion of that, make sure you read that before the
next episode, which actually will be out a week from this one-ish, I promise, because
that one's already shot.
I don't have an excuse.
Well, I think at this point, we'll announce on Twitter the release date, so you guys know
our schedule a little better.
We're adults.
We're adults.
So obviously we have the interactive element of our project, where you suggest to us scenes,
tropes, characters, you know, and we have gotten very many, you know, very good ideas.
Uncle Neil, for instance, was one million percent not our brainchild.
He is the gift that keeps on giving, and we thank you for him.
But like as with last time, we went ahead and cobbled together a very, very rough possible
skeleton of an outline.
And so what we're going to do now is kind of explain the skeleton for Viridian Saga
book two.
Okay, so in the broadest of strokes, what is this one going to be a parody of?
Because we're doing dystopia in the third book.
Yeah.
So this one is the parody of New Moon, where our lovebirds have, where everything was perfect,
and then all of a sudden, no, it's not.
And it's that, it's just the continuation, the long drawn out, will they, won't they,
where's he gone.
So if you've read Awoken, it's basically going to be a novel length version of chapter 19.
Yeah.
Except of course, we have to bring in our, the setup of the ethnic third wheel love interest.
Yeah.
And his blossoming powers, which he has due to his, you know, wonderful exotic ethnicness.
Yeah.
As somewhat inspired by Jacob Black.
But also, it's also kind of a dig on things like, well, for one thing, Tiger's Curse,
a book that nobody but us read, but we were just so inspired by.
And we highly recommend.
Oh yeah, that's part of your homework.
That's part of your homework.
Read Tiger's Curse.
Go ahead and throw that poor author a few bones, because, you know, we rag on her so
much.
We could at least give her some money.
And then come back and let's talk about It's-a-Me, Maritzia.
Because that's...
And the guru in the woods!
And the guru in the woods!
With the bath bombs and the copper tub that he has for our white princess in the Mediterranean
Chateau.
So anyway, that's why you have to read it, so we can talk about it more in the comments.
So we're going to watch the movie Eat, Pray, Love for inspiration, not read the books,
because that's what Sarah would do.
So we'll do that at some point within the next...
We really want to play with this whole white person goes to a foreign country to find themselves
and white savior trope, so that's definitely going to be a big part of this that we're
going to be making fun of.
That's our broad strokes idea.
Let's discuss this outline.
So of course the book's got to open with Andi reflecting on how much her life has changed
since she met The One.
Like two weeks ago.
Yeah, and you definitely want to keep the frame very tight.
Of course everything is awesome, life is fantastic, she's best friends with his sister, and it's
only been two weeks.
Yeah, we were like, didn't want it to be such a knockoff of Twilight, but I guess that's
kind of inevitable.
So we were like, what happens?
I guess he like almost like sleep eats her soul or something.
Obviously give us suggestions for what this inciting incident could be to make it maybe
slightly less of a Twilight knockoff, I don't know.
He needs to go find a soul to sate his hunger, and he feels bad, so obviously he's gotta
A. leave her for her own good, and B. go devour her soul somewhere.
No fucks were given that day about the people who were going to die.
She just obviously is just like catatonic.
Yeah, we're definitely not going with the ethical vampires here.
No, he's awful and she's awful, it's awesome.
But he doesn't tell her she's going, he just fucking goes, and I think we had this possible
reveal that he left a note with Uncle Neil who forgot to give it to her or something
like that.
But of course, there's gotta be at least two scenes where it's kind of like, it's right
there, and Neil's like, I had, you know, never mind.
As a side note, with Riley, I'm sort of wondering if, do we even want to try and do the thing
where it's like, well I was going after a wife beater to feed my soul, like it shouldn't
be like, he goes after-
Yeah, that could be interesting.
Well, what do you think?
Should he-
Just be a terrible person who just indiscriminately-
Should he just go after whoever, or should he go after only the bad ones, like Dexter?
Yeah.
You know?
He only eats the souls of serial killers now, he's a reformed eldritch horror.
Like dog kickers.
He's a reformed eldritch horror.
So Vic's relatives come to school and convinces the teacher to take the class to India, cause
why not?
Yeah, and they're in high school, that seems legit.
Yeah, no, it's the big spring break.
I think it should also be like, a little missionary thing as well, like, hey, pay money, let's
go to another country and build houses.
Yeah, yeah, they're like Habitat for Humanity or something.
Let's go dig some holes in the ground.
Already there's too much thought being put into this.
Well I think this fits for Sarah Ellison though, because she comes from a very religious background,
you know in high school she went on a missionary trip.
For the Anaprotestants.
And she just learned so much about herself.
The Anaprotestants go to Dayton, like that's their mission.
She goes from Trotwood to Dayton.
And that's very big exotic.
So they go to India, and that's like, you know, about in the winter, spring break.
Airport of course is right next to the Ganges River.
There are people bathing in it.
So this is where we-
I think we should only call like, Mumbai is just only referred to as Bombay.
Like the whole time.
I feel like maybe some people will try to correct whoever's talking.
And they're like, just kaboosh.
Istanbul is Constantinople.
Uncle Neil also shows up.
We definitely want him driving-
He plows out of the Ganges.
Driving his car out of the Ganges.
Fishing water out of his ear.
What'd I miss? Why are you here?
I forget, there's something I was supposed to tell you.
Yeah, it's like somewhere in the middle he shows up for some reason.
What's the reason, audience?
You would definitely want to crib a little from Transformers.
No, it was that Annie's mom gets high.
Oh yeah!
We need to do some-
Because it's funny.
We need to do some Revenge of the Fallen action.
Mom gets high, I'm-
I don't know, like peace pipe.
It should be a peace pipe or something.
But that's while they're in India.
However, when they first get off the airplane,
and this is where we start getting into Act 2,
a turbaned assassin attacks.
Oh yeah.
Now, here's the thing.
Everyone will always think all this stuff
is for Andy,
but it's actually for Vic.
Yeah, and there's gonna be a big reveal in the middle
that we find out
that Vic is actually-
So things will repeatedly happen.
Yeah.
Things will repeatedly happen.
Andy's like, obviously it's because of me.
So some special things start to happen to Vic.
Like we go to the rat temple,
and all the rats just-
I feel so dirty.
I feel so dirty.
We've gotta be really careful about this.
Yeah, I mean-
This is gonna take a deft hand.
Of course Andy thinks it's all about her,
no it's not.
What we're just gonna have to do is that
in the descriptions, it has to be
what characters say and how things are described.
This is gonna be really hard.
We looked up for the Hindi word
because we were like,
Andy's gotta be the special.
So we looked up the Hindi word
for special, which is
I think the sesa.
I might need to double check
any Hindi or Urdu speakers
on my pronunciation.
I studied Hindi very briefly,
but it was years ago.
I forget things the day after I learn them.
Meanwhile, this is all going on in the background.
Bree is having awesome Indiana Jones adventures.
Pretty much discovering why
Andy can't be the special.
She's like, I don't think it's you.
It said it had to be someone that was like,
I'm from this land.
They meet multiple Maharajas.
Every town has a Maharaj.
And in the midpoint,
we reveal that Vic is the special
and has been the whole time.
Somehow or other, this ties in with
Cthulhu lore somehow.
75% into this story,
Riley has to come back.
We have to have the scene where
Andy almost kisses Vic.
I don't know, magical starlit night.
Or maybe he's
tapped into his
special powers.
And she cannot
resist them. She just has a thing
for avatars.
I'm imagining
a big Bollywood wedding
that they just get invited to.
That would be kind of awesome.
There's a single
red rose.
It shouldn't even come to a kiss.
Just be like, he caresses her with a red rose
and then Riley shows up.
He knows exactly what that means.
He's seen Cholet.
He knows what's up.
I don't think the rose was in Cholet.
Riley hurts Vic.
Or Vic's powered now and is actually
a match for Riley.
And Andy's like, say.
Because wasn't the
idea behind the special going to be
turns out he is in fact
the 10th avatar of Vishnu.
Kalki, who
is destined to bring
an end to this world and a beginning to the next.
And only she can stop him.
Obviously.
Maybe this is her destiny all along.
She's the heart of Vishnu.
She's the only one
who can never stop anyone.
She's the heart of everything.
But she just doesn't listen.
Why would you leave me?
I feel so scorned.
And now she understands.
She thinks about Scarlet.
And wonders
if this was the scorn.
Could I turn out like her?
Now that I've been scorned.
So that's our end of act two.
And Vic gets kidnapped
by...
So this is our bad guy.
So who's our bad guy, Lindsay?
Oh yeah.
Wasn't it Loki?
Oh yeah.
Kidnapped by Loki
in Guise of Indian God.
And I would honestly
at this point say how drunk were we when we realized
but I know we were fat.
We were at a tea place with Lisa
who is super pregnant and therefore can't drink.
So we were so sober.
Sober cracked out.
Which is great.
My thought about Loki was that it's
just like Tom Hiddleston.
Word for word he keeps quoting
the movies or skirting the
copyright of quoting the movies.
And it's awesome.
That's all Sarah really knows
about Norse mythology.
Anyway, so Vic gets
kidnapped and then Riley doesn't want to help
even though it would be saving the world.
So Andi's on her own. Of course with Bri.
Yeah, we need to find a way to make
Riley suck less
than he is in this outline.
I mean like he sucks
but he needs to be kind of like
an alluring kind of suck.
Like if you were writing
an asshole that also still
Like a Christian Grey type who sucks
that the readers like for some
unfettered reason.
You know how everyone will be like, but by the end of the book
she really sort of comes into
her own and she's not getting pushed around
anymore.
That's exactly what's happening
by the third of those books.
Since it is Loki, we do learn that Vic
is in fact not the 10th Avatar Vishnu
but some Nordic
the special. Like he's actually
the Nordic special and it's not gonna be
the Hindu version
of the end of this world
but the Nordic Ragnarok
which is basically the same thing.
I mean it's the same but not.
You know obviously details differ.
But the whole vague like this world is ending
and a new one's gonna begin. One world ends in fire
and the other ends in ice.
In Hinduism it's
the end of the world
is considered a good thing
because this world
I forget the word for it but it basically means
dark times. It's like Kali something.
And it's like
this world sucks but then the
10th Avatar Vishnu's gonna come and make
this world end and then we're gonna have a good age
and it's gonna be like the fun awesome age
that sucks considerably less than this age
does and we live in the age of suck.
And I know I'm doing
complete justice to this
really in-depth
proud history
and deeply religious
concept. The age of suck
is what it's
official term in Hindi.
And the ending is
basically that.
The world doesn't end. It is reborn
in fact. Surprise.
And there's no Thursdays.
That was gonna be a joke. No more Thors
days. But also
it ends with there is
not only a dystopia in this
new horrible changed world but also a matriarchy
and only our heroes
have any memory of the way things
should be.
And so we're thinking this one's gonna end on
a cliffhanger. So that is our very
very very loose
skeleton. Obviously there are a lot of holes
that need filling in in our plot.
And also
what would you like to see parodied
in this one that we haven't touched upon yet?
Obviously we talk, we dig a lot
on things like pray love tiger's curse
and new moon and hinting
at things like divergent
which will obviously come in a third book. But what else?
Hannah Jones. Of course Transformers
Revenge of the Fallen. Yes.
The greatest sequel of all time.
She hasn't finished it.
It got like 40 minutes in.
We tried once.
So leave your comments.
Give us your suggestions.
We talk not only about plot points but also
new characters, new
faces. Obviously Neil
kind of takes up all of the awesome for the book
but we'd be interested to see if
there are any others. I think we need a
Maharaja guru.
It should be like he's a Maharaja
but he's a guru.
This is a character that keeps popping up throughout
the book. It's like I thought you were a Maharaja. Yeah I'm also
a guru. As always leave your
suggestions, comments
and warnings
on
SheaApocalypse.com where we read
the comments. Also be sure to tweet at us and
follow us at SheaApocalypse.
And remember
next week
we are going to be doing our first author interview.
Lisa is going to be filling in for
Nella. I will not be here.
The week after that is going to be
another review. We are going to
review John Scalzi's new book
which you can't read
because it's not out yet.
So we're going to review a thing before
it comes out. Go team.
Exciting. Yay.
You know that life, it sure does happen
doesn't it Lindsay? And again
we are very sorry at our inability
to keep to a schedule. Summer is
difficult because we are basically not
here during the weekends. We're here to shoot an edit.
Damn day jobs
slash ponds. I haven't even been to the beach yet.
I know. I have not been
near a body of water and we live literally
by the ocean. Yeah.
Our lives are hard. Our lives are really
hard. It's so hard.
It's just so freaking hard.
.
