Of all the blogs and essays speculating that the SARS-CoV-2 virus was man-made, this one
seems to have got the most attention, so I'm happy to take up the numerous requests and
challenges for me to fact-check it.
It's by someone called Nicholas Wade. Who's he? According to one poster on the forum,
he's a well-respected journalist with a 30-plus year track record who used to write for Nature
magazine and the New York Times. Unfortunately, you can't assume he's got everything right
by simply having a bit of faith and weighing up the credibility of any journalist based
on their experience, reputation and track record. If that was the case, then Wade would
actually be off to a pretty bad start, because he doesn't have a great track record of accurate
reporting and he has a pretty low reputation among the scientific community for getting
his facts straight.
Fortunately, fact-checking isn't about personalities. It's about checking someone's source to see
if his claim matches. So even a journalist with a great track record can get things wrong,
and even a journalist with a terrible track record can get things right.
Neither can you assume that the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists has fact-checked his piece
because it's not a peer-reviewed journal. I can't go through the whole thing in a short
video, and it includes a range of arguments from politics and personalities to hard science.
My beat is the science, but whatever I choose to debunk, I could be cherry-picking. So I
asked people on the Forum, who cited Wade's essay, to pick the most convincing piece of
scientific evidence that they found to support the idea that the virus is man-made. They
cited Wade's critique of the Nature Medicine Study by Anderson et al, the seamless method
of genome manipulation, and a claim about a National Institute of Health funding brief.
So let's go through them.
You could start with this take-down of Dr Anderson's letter to the Journal of Nature
Medicine, as this was the main basis for your strong claim that it was not lab-made. Just
to be clear, I'm a complete idiot, so I can't make any such claim. I can only tell you what
the science says. It's the science that shows it's man-made. If you have some personal,
political or religious belief that leads you to reject scientific conclusions, that's fine
with me. This is the part of Wade's claim that deals with the Nature Medicine Study.
According to Wade, a second statement that had enormous influence in shaping public attitudes
was a letter, in other words an opinion piece, not a scientific article. This is the study
he's referring to, and his claim that it's just an opinion piece is inaccurate and very
misleading. Firstly, it's listed as an article in the correspondence section of Nature Medicine.
A correspondence article is certainly less than a peer-reviewed paper, but it's more
than just an opinion piece, unless you consider inferences in science to be nothing more than
opinions. The correspondence section of Nature Medicine is a forum for professional researchers,
and articles published there still have to adhere to scientific principles. The scientific
evidence, methodology and inferences presented in correspondence articles can be responded
to corrected, confirmed or disproved, just like any other published study. Far from being
disproved or corrected, the article, authored by senior virology researchers from the Scripps
Institute, Tulane University, the University of Sydney, the University of Edinburgh and
Columbia University, has been cited by over 3,000 scientific studies. Wade goes on to
say, the discussion part of the letter begins, it is improbable that SARS-CoV-2 emerged through
laboratory manipulation of a related SARS-CoV-like coronavirus. But wait, didn't the lead say
the virus had clearly not been manipulated? Actually, no, it didn't say that at all. What
it said was, our analyses clearly show that SARS-CoV-2 is not a laboratory construct,
or a purposefully manipulated virus. If you think what Wade says means the same thing
as what the authors said, why did he need to change it? As I explained in my video,
The Scientific Method Made Easy, the word show in a scientific paper means something
has been demonstrated scientifically. Taking that word out completely changed this from
a scientific inference based on the evidence provided into an opinion based on dogma. When
the correct wording is put back, there's nothing contradictory in these two terms at
all. For example, the fossil and stratigraphical evidence clearly shows that animals evolved
over billions of years. The reason this is called the theory of evolution is that science
can never rule out the possibility that they were placed there by aliens or popped into
existence at the whim of a deity, who cleverly arranged things to look as though animals
had evolved over time. It's just that such an event is improbable.
As far as substance goes, Wade criticises two claims made by the authors of the Nature
Medicine article. Wade says, first they say the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 binds very
well to its target, the human ACE2 receptor, but does so in a different way from that which
physical calculations suggest would be the best fit. Therefore, the virus must have arisen
by natural selection, not manipulation. If that's all the authors had said, then
Wade could be forgiven for thinking the inference doesn't match the evidence. In fact, what
the authors show is a lot stronger and more detailed than just that one short sentence.
Another part of the virus spike protein that binds to the ACE2 receptor in a human cell
is called the receptor binding domain, the RBD. The Nature Medicine article explains
that five of the amino acids that make up the RBD aren't found in other SARS-CoV viruses.
So that's one piece of strong evidence against manipulation. When researchers are trying
to see how close a natural zoonotic virus is to becoming infectious, they want to make
as few changes as possible to just get it to that point. There'd be no point in spending
time and effort replacing five out of the six amino acids.
The other strong piece of evidence is that these radical changes wouldn't be expected
to work anyway. Researchers always run calculations first to see what effect any change might
have. They don't do things willy-nilly by trial and error, that would just be wasting
their time. The Nature Medicine authors discovered that computation analyses predict that the
interaction is not ideal. In other words, those changes are unlikely to work.
So again, no point in doing them. Because while lab researchers wouldn't waste their
time coming up with weird and inefficient structures that are unlikely to work, nature
does it all the time. Because it works not by calculation, but through a process of trial
and error. So there's a lot more evidence than Wade's
simplistic summation. A good example of how evolution comes out with odd and counterintuitive
designs is easier to see in this example. This hand has wrist bones for swivelling and
an intricate array of knuckles, fingers and a thumb, perfect for grasping branches, picking
up food and fashioning tools. It looks like an example of something intelligently designed
for its purpose. Except it's not a hand, it's a remnant of evolution inside a dolphin's
flipper. An intelligent designer wouldn't have bothered spending time and effort coming
up with a pointless and intricate system of wrist bones, knuckles, fingers and thumbs,
or if you prefer, ankles, tarsals, metatarsals and toes, to put them inside a flipper where
they can't be used. But the hit and miss approach of evolution throws up all kinds of oddities
like this all the time, not only in the animal world, but in the world of viruses too.
So Wade is firstly misquoting and then completely misrepresenting the author's evidence and
their conclusion. The problem is that most people don't read the study, they just read
Wade's summary of what he claims the study says. Wade goes on to say, the author's basic
assumption, not spelled out, is that anyone trying to make a bat virus bind to human cells
could do so in only one way. First they would calculate the strongest possible fit between
the human ACE2 receptor and the spike protein with which the virus latches onto it. Then
they would design the spike protein. But the reason that's not spelled out is because that's
not the author's assumption. It's Wade's assumption that that's how virus research
is done. The authors know better because they're virology researchers themselves.
Researchers in this field are not looking for the strongest possible fit. As I explained
earlier, they're trying to determine how close a natural virus is to infecting humans, a
transition known as spillover. So they're looking for the minimal number of changes
needed for a possible fit. Wade then tells the virology researchers, again, how he thinks
they do their job. And again, he gets it wrong. This ignores the way that virologists do,
in fact, get spike proteins to bind to chosen targets, which is not by calculation, but
by splicing in spike protein genes from other viruses or by serial passage.
The authors aren't ignoring Wade's imagined account of how they do their research. They
happen to know that researchers in this field do make their calculations first, and then
they get the spike proteins to bind to chosen targets based on those calculations. How many
of the people who were convinced by Wade's essay actually bothered to check the Nature
Medicine article to see if it says what Wade claims it says.
Wade's next argument against the Nature Medicine article concerns the nature of the virus backbone,
which I covered in my first video on the origin of SARS-CoV-2. I said this. When researchers
are bioengineering a virus, they usually don't build the entire thing from scratch.
What they're interested in is the business end of the virus, called the spike proteins.
They house the receptor binding domain, the RBD, where the virus attaches itself to the
host cell, and the cleavage sites, where it breaks in and enters the cell. So, except
in exceptional circumstances, they build the spike proteins onto the structure of an existing
infectious virus. I suppose the best analogy is graffiti artists. They usually don't
spend lots of time and money building an entire wall from scratch in order to spray paint
their art. They find an existing wall and use that.
Wade doesn't dispute the fact that virologists use existing backbones in their research or
that the SARS-CoV-2 backbone is novel, but he argues that researchers might have built
it themselves because, he says, backbones are quite easy to make. So it's possible.
Since he doesn't quantify how easy it is, we need to check his source and find out.
Unfortunately, as so often in his essay, he doesn't give a source, it's just his assumption.
Since Wade has no expertise in this field, we need to find out from a real research virologist
how easy it is to make a novel backbone. A couple of researchers I spoke to thought
it would take years, and when I did a search online, I found that the Ben Hur-Lee lab,
which does research in this field, says making a new backbone takes months or even years.
Robert Gary, a professor of microbiology and immunology at Tulane University and one of
the authors of the Nature Medicine study, didn't even think it was possible. He told
Business Insider, people just don't know enough about what makes a virus pathogenic
to be able to assemble that. So quite easy varies from a few months to impossible. But
even if we take the lowest estimate of a few months, why would any researcher bother? After
all, researchers are trying to see how close a virus is to spill over, and that's why all
their research is focused on this, the spike protein, the infectious part of the virus.
They don't need to spend time, effort and money trying to build a completely new backbone,
and Wade doesn't explain why they would, except he assumes it's quite easy.
Using the analogy, when most of us see something like this, we'd say it clearly shows that
someone spray painted a rock. We wouldn't seriously entertain the idea that someone
took time, effort and money to buy a lot of gravel melted in a furnace to make the rock
and then go to even greater efforts to make the rock look perfectly natural. I think we'd
all agree that such a pointless and time consuming exercise is improbable. The more obvious and
simple explanation is that someone's just spray painted a rock. It's a principle known
as Occam's Razor. Wade closes the section on the Nature Science paper by saying, and
that's it. These are the two arguments made by the Anderson group in support of their
declaration that the SARS-2 virus was clearly not manipulated.
Well, that's not quite it. First of all, this wasn't a declaration, it was an inference
based on the evidence that Wade mostly misrepresented. Secondly, there was a lot more in the study
than just two arguments, and certainly a lot that's very different to Wade's two line
misquotes. He continues, and this conclusion, grounded in nothing but two inconclusive speculations,
convinced the world's press that SARS-2 could not have escaped from a lab. Again, they certainly
weren't inconclusive speculations. They were very detailed and very conclusive. But you
wouldn't know that if all you read was Wade's inaccurate summation.
It isn't the world's press that was convinced by the Nature Medicine Study. It's unlikely
most journalists read it. It was thousands of virology researchers who cited it in their
own research papers, like these ones. They were convinced because they're professional
researchers who didn't see these scientific inferences as inconclusive speculations. They
did read the study and they did understand it. That's why they cited it.
So we'll move on to the second poster who asked me to fact check Wade's essay. He
wrote, I think the most important part to address there would be where he talks about
the seamless method of genome manipulation. Here's the part of Wade's essay being referred
to. Wade says, Unfortunately, this was another case of poor science, in the sense defined
above. True, some older methods of cutting and pasting viral genomes retain telltale
signs of manipulation, but newer methods, called noceum or seamless approaches, leave
no defining marks. But the authors aren't arguing that cutting
and pasting viral genomes retains telltale signs of manipulation, or that it represents
any kind of evidence that SARS-CoV-2 is natural. This seems to be an argument Wade has invented
himself, just so he can knock it down, which he then proceeds to do. He says, But newer
methods, called noceum or seamless approaches, leave no defining marks, nor do other methods
for manipulating viruses, such as serial passage, the repeated transfer of viruses
from one culture of cells to another. If a virus has been manipulated, whether with a
seamless method or by serial passage, there's no way of knowing that this is the case. Anderson
and his colleagues were assuring their readers of something they could not know. But Anderson
and his colleagues weren't trying to assure readers of anything of the sort. They never
even mentioned it. No one's trying to argue that there might
or might not be telltale signs of manipulation. It's irrelevant. It's the fact that these
features are there at all, which shows a natural evolutionary path. The noceum technique is
a method of gene insertion used in cloning. It doesn't mean we can't see these new
genetic sequences, so it doesn't affect the evidence at all.
Going back to the example of a hand inside a dolphin's flipper, I'm equally happy
to accept a creationist's argument that any intelligent designer could have done
this without leaving any incriminating toolmarks. But that's not the point. It's the fact
that all these hand bones are in there that argues against intelligent design, because
an intelligent designer wouldn't have bothered with all these pointless and complex design
features. And we can see transitions for some of these changes, just as we can see
the pathway to many of the odd and counter-intuitive features of SARS-CoV-2 in other viruses.
On to the next argument in Wade's essay that someone said is the most convincing.
The poster C-Panic gave this example, so again, this is his choice, not my cherry pick. Look
at this section. This is the grant from NIH. C-Panic then quoted part of a National Institute
of Health grant document addressed to the Wuhan Institute of Virology, which has a brief
laying out what its funding is to be used for. C-Panic then explained. What this means,
in non-technical language, he said, is that she set out to create…
But wait a minute. This is just a huge chunk of text lifted directly from Wade's essay.
This is what Wade thinks it means. So how do we know he's understood it, or that he's
explaining it accurately? The good news is that Wade gives a source
for his claims, which means it can be easily checked. This is the NIH funding brief he's
referring to, and he even quotes the section of the document he's referring to. Wade
claims it instructs Dr Shee, the researcher, to create novel coronaviruses with the highest
possible infectivity for human cells, which, if true, would be an incredibly reckless and
dangerous thing for any lab to do. Making the most infectious virus possible is the
recipe for a terror weapon. And even if you believe that there was a conspiracy to make
such a weapon, it would be a bit odd for the United States to fund such research in China,
and odder still that it would be spelled out in a publicly available document.
So wherever else you think this conspiracy is being played out, it's certainly not in
the document Wade's citing, or in the passage he cites.
As I mentioned earlier, the spillover potential of a naturally occurring virus means the potential
of the virus to mutate into a form that can infect humans. So researchers need to identify
which of the many viruses found in nature is closest to this point. In other words,
the idea is to make as few changes as possible to the spike protein just to get to the point
where spillover will occur, not to make the most infectious virus. The reason for doing
this is it helps predict which of the viruses in nature is closest to becoming infectious
to humans. Wade compounds his error by adding,
The methodical approach was designed to find the best combination of coronavirus backbone
and spike protein for infecting human cells. I found it very hard to believe the NIH brief
said this, because it's funding research into the infectivity of the virus, which doesn't
come from the backbone, it comes from the spike protein. As we've seen, for experimentation
purposes researchers simply pick a backbone off the shelf. And when I searched for anything
resembling this claim in Wade's source, I couldn't find it and Wade doesn't quote it.
So that's the problem with believing Wade on the basis that he sounds credible or assuming
he has a good track record as a science journalist. So those were supposedly the most convincing
pieces of scientific evidence in Wade's essay, not picked by me but by people on the
forum who responded when asked. Of course, now that this has been addressed, I have no
doubt it'll be answered with the what about arguments. What about the rest of Wade's essay?
What about this blog or that video? What about something else? All I can say is, guys, even
if I had time to make a hundred videos a year in order to whack down every new misunderstanding
and misquote that pops up on the internet, you don't need me to fact check this stuff
anyway. You can fact check it yourself. Wade asks why virologists don't make the
same claims he's making. It can't be because he's wrong. It must be because researchers
are all corrupt. As with climate change, evolution and every other scientific conclusion that
people don't want to believe, they use the standard fallback position that scientists
don't risk having their next grant application turned down. I've covered this default excuse
in several videos. If the research conflicts with your belief, it can't be because you're
wrong. The research must be wrong, and therefore all the researchers must be corrupt. The simple
fact of the matter is that other virologists don't contradict the published science because
they've ascertained that the published science is correct.
Finally, if you're seeing ads on this video, it's because I've now monetised the channel
and have made Health in Harmony the beneficiary of the income. Health in Harmony is the charity
that I've been asking people to support if they want to support this channel, so if you
want to find out more about it, take a look at the links in the video description. And
for those who've donated in the past, thanks very much for doing so, and I hope many of
you will continue to donate in the future, even though we now have advertisements running.
If you're not seeing ads on this video, then that's due to my pathetic technology skills.
