So this week it's we begin to talk about plot and then we start tiptoeing into characters.
We have a lot of comments to go through and you guys gave us our homework.
To everyone who commented, thank you so much, you kept me sane while I was at work.
If we don't read your stuff on the air, we're sorry, we kind of have to go through a highlights
reel.
Before playing the home game, we might not really understand the Lovecraft environment
or universe.
Alan Smith gave a really good quick rundown of what the deal is, just in case you were
there wondering what the deuces was all about.
The short idea of the universe is that all our everyday stuff is a small lacuna of stability
in what is otherwise a really strange and malevolent universe.
The central conflict of most of the stories is some poor schmuck who breaks out of the
insulated world we all live in to discover the actual truth, trademarked, and what happens
to them.
So, I don't know about you, but that sounds like perfect romance paranormal material for
me.
There you go, only she can handle the absolute truth.
There was a little pushback on that though, Yvonne pointed out that we might want to consider
that having a Lovecraft theme would be an audience alienating premise.
That also does kind of lean into some copyright concerns that people have brought up.
And I just want to say, don't worry about it.
If there's one thing that Fifty Shades of Grey has taught us, it's that we can just
search replace the shit out of whatever we want.
Search replaces your friend.
It's odd to me because this was kind of the original crowdsourced universe that Lovecraft
started it and then his colleagues and all these people kind of built on this universe
that he created and it just kind of built and built and built so it is odd that people
have that on lockdown.
But don't worry about it.
Worst case scenario, it's Lovecraft inspired.
Joshua Pelfrey points out that Lovecraft stuff was really racist so we probably want to include
smoke or racism.
Can do.
So as you remember, our question last week was what is the driving force behind our romantic
couple getting together?
And of the comments we received, I have to say I like that we kept running with the dream
thing.
Yeah.
Like love dreams enter a huge part of the Lovecraft mythos.
Narla Hottup Bonaparte.
Guys, I'm going to be butchering a lot of names.
You've been warned.
But Bonaparte and Bonaparte pointed out that in Call of Cthulhu, when Cthulhu is about
to wake up, a lot of artistic minded people start to feel the presence of the old one.
So they kind of felt moved to make drawings and sculptures of the creature.
We got to start with a dream.
Yeah.
Definitely got to start with a dream.
But that's how she starts imagining him.
One person, and this is kind of troubling to me because I can't find the comment, it's
a person, whoever you are, sorry.
Yeah, your comment was great and that's why we're saying it now.
Someone suggested that the basic overarching plot is what is the contrived nonsense that
drives Cthulhu to take a human form and go to high school?
It's that there's some prophecy that this girl is going to stop him ending the world.
And it turns out that prophecy is totally true, but she stops him ending the world because
he falls in love with her.
That's right.
Fulfilling prophecy, motherfuckers.
And then he doesn't want to destroy humanity because he's learned about our love.
It's like in the Day of the Earth, still the remake, not the original.
I support going ahead with this 100%.
I think that's a good starting point.
I didn't know you had love.
Oh god, I have no idea you had love.
I have no idea about love.
Love is awesome.
V. Voltaire strikes again.
They touch each other and then bam, soul bonding.
Bitches love soul bonding.
They share dreams and this is kind of how they get to know each other.
He's like hunting her in her dreams, but he's really falling in love with her as he does.
She's really threatened by this and also really turned on.
Jacob Littleton Post mentioned that what we could do was while the old ones were sleeping,
they were tapping into the unconscious minds of humanity near them.
So when Cthulhu is finally brought back through a botch summoning, or in our case, to stop
the person who would stop the end of the world, he's stuck with the most compelling image
crafted by the strongest desires of these minds, aka the young female desires for the
perfect boy.
So hence why he's a hottie.
There are quite a few where she writes poetry to her elder abomination, which I enjoyed
a lot.
I won't read them here, but there were quite a few poems which were very enjoyable to read.
Here's one scene by Michael Witry that I think captured what we're going for very well.
Do you, will you always believe me, even when every one of your senses, every one of your
memories is telling you that I'm lying?
What could I say, she thought, always.
That's actually kind of perfect.
Yeah, that's great.
I might have to copy that one word for word.
That makes me feel like this one line that Carlos Ernesto McReynolds offered where he
feels that the phrase, the most merciful thing in protagonist's world is the inability
of her mind to correlate all its contents.
Let's look at our friend Bella here.
What I find most remarkable about Bella, and this by Stephanie Meyer's own admission, is
that she is so blank slate that like literally any woman, white woman, white woman.
And you, white woman.
Can slip into her shoes and be her.
Her only thing that she does is read.
And cook for her father.
Yeah, but mostly it's reading.
And I think reading is interesting because it's a very passive activity.
Oh yeah.
The thing about the reading aspect, which I find the most interesting about the character
Bella is when she says she's reading, it's all class reading.
But it's also some stuff she's read before for class.
Yes, she's a reader and she can reference all these things, but it's not from her own
pleasure of it.
It's because I've done it before for something else that I had to do.
So I, you know, reading it, I never even really got the sense that she actually enjoys reading.
It's just something she's actually able to do without hurting herself.
So I would say the major difference between Bella and her copy, Anastasia, down the road
is that Anastasia is a distillation of everything that's really obnoxious about Bella.
She's not as socially awkward as Anastasia, but Anastasia has more hatred of other people.
See Bella just sort of-
She's a lot more threatened by other women.
Exactly.
Like Bella is just kind of dismissive of everybody.
Bella is never active in friendships.
People come to her to be friends with her.
People are obsessed with Bella.
Like they're trying to crack her, like she's this big project.
Yeah.
And it's like, no.
So we have our Bella.
She goes from point A to point B, and we'll discuss location later.
She has to be, I think it's most important that she is leaving her mother to live with
her father.
A lot of the Twilights.
Yeah.
Like a lot of the knockoffs do.
The thing I have found is that the mother is a child.
And there's this implication that the Bella character has always taken care of her child
mother.
Well this is something, this is a recurring thing I see pop up in Stephanie Meyer's writing
is that her teenagers are not teenagers, they're mothers.
They're 36 year old mothers that are taking care of everyone and they have like this giant
martyr complex and they just cannot wait until they can sacrifice themselves for someone
else.
Like that's one of the very, like hell this is the first Twilight, that's how it begins.
Like oh man, I'm so glad I'm dying for someone that I love.
Right?
Yeah.
They're so okay.
Women love martyrs when they are martyrs.
Yes.
They love men that are martyrs.
It was like my theory that I just developed yesterday that Edward is basically the Phantom,
but hot.
Oh.
Yeah.
Because he's obsessive.
Yeah.
And possessive.
Mm-hmm.
And Bella is the honest with herself fangirl who loves this shit.
You know, whereas in reality you'd probably be a little freaked out unless there's something
wrong with you, which is the real problem with their relationship.
He just does them and she just happens to like them.
And I feel like there's that weird honesty with Fifty Shades of Grey where she's kind
of aware that this is like incredibly messed up, whereas in Twilight it's just like, nope.
No.
In one way.
Whee!
And also, I really hate these books and their fetishization of the one.
You're my first boyfriend.
You're my very first one.
No, I have never even looked at another man.
I have never even felt the kindling of the slightest bit of want in my heart.
Like Anna who's 22 and has never had an orgasm, never been attracted to another man.
Never touched herself.
Yeah.
That I really don't buy.
Yeah.
Nothing.
She has had...
It's the ultimate like purity.
It's just like, it's supposed to prove something.
And it makes me feel so good.
And I don't understand why people relate to that, because it's like, that's no one.
I think people identify with it, not because they have lived it, but because they do, deep
down inside, believe that it's the ideal.
Yeah.
That's how it should be.
Yeah.
Yeah.
She'll feel nothing until the one comes along.
Yeah.
Because you're only given one.
Yeah.
You're only given one.
So we're going to do that.
Yeah.
Yeah.
She feels nothing until the one comes along.
Yeah.
So we need a father.
We need a mother.
We need...
Yeah.
Maybe a bitchy best friend.
We need, you know, Cthulhu.
Who's his family?
Yeah.
And we also need some like really interesting backstories for all of them, so we can just
kind of allude to them and they completely ignore them.
Yeah.
Because...
They don't play into the plot at all.
Because remember, we're not here to write a great book.
We're here to write a romance paranormal novel, which means we can have all manner and allude
to all manner of interesting things in the background and then we'll just breeze right
by them.
Yeah.
Wee!
Nyarlathotep.
Nyarlathotep.
I really want him to be like the Carlisle.
I'm just throwing it out here.
I want him to be the Carlisle who like understands humans the most because he's the one that's
traveled the longest among us.
Yeah.
He's like dad Weasley.
He's not the one that's been like sleeping.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Weasley.
Little Carlisle.
Tell us.
Who are our fellow characters going to be?
Remember, we have female characters with a blank slate, we have a flighty mother, the
absent emotionally father.
Since we're a little bit more sophisticated than Stephanie Meyer, we can also start thinking
about our antagonist.
Mm.
Because why not?
I mean, I feel like he's going to choose not to end the world, so he's going to piss
somebody off.
So the someone who gets pissed off is the one we have to save the day from.
Yeah.
So who does he piss off by not following his orders?
How can we make him as shh, or her, as thin, as little motivation, as boring?
What's his or her vested interest in seeing the world end?
Hey Vishnu, we can start over again, right?
Yeah, Vishnu.
Oh, that's where Vishnu comes in.
Oh yeah.
We're going to start over.
Don't worry.
We're going to start over.
Don't worry about it.
We're going to start over again.
It turns out the new world is just like the old one.
Bullet, dodge.
