The Oscars are one of those things that we care about because we are told to care about them,
despite the fact that we say we don't care about them,
and then every year we vow not to care about them because they clearly don't reflect our taste,
and then we write big, long think pieces about how irrelevant the Oscars are
and how much we don't care about the Oscars.
So, um, why don't we care about the Oscars?
The general consensus is that it's because the Oscars are less concerned with actual quality
or important movies that further the form of cinema as an art
so much as hitting repetitive and predictable Oscar movie attributes.
Is it character-driven? Does it take place in Hollywood?
Is Meryl Streep in it? Does it involve the Holocaust?
Are the black characters either slaves or beleaguered servants of some sort?
Are the Weinsteins involved?
Is Leonardo DiCaprio performing some form of desperate self-flagellation?
But, here is the thing.
It wasn't always like this.
There didn't used to be a little sub-industry catering to Oscar glory.
When did we start using terms like Oscar bait?
When did best picture go from generally being agreed upon as the most important picture of the year to...
...not?
So, rather than doing a history of the Oscars,
I wanted to look at a history of what type of movie is favored by the Oscars.
Because it wasn't always so predictable.
And the Oscar goes to...
Okay, so first, who is the Academy and how do you get into it anyway?
Well, you win an award or you beg your way in.
And also someone has to sponsor you if you didn't win an award.
It's kind of like being an AA.
For instance, George Lucas, he is not a member of the Academy.
He actually declined membership, but Meatloaf is.
And actually, Meatloaf considers himself a sign of diversity within the Academy.
You know, because War Horse made him cry instead of, like, the artist.
The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Science was created in 1926
when MGM co-founder Louis B. Mayer and some other studio heads
agreed that they needed a film organization that sounded prestigy
and also preempted the need for unions.
Also, for legitimacy, maybe it should give out awards or something.
As opposed to almost all other film award ceremonies, like the Golden Globes,
which are awarded by the press or critics,
the Academy Awards are voted on by prestige industry people.
And that's why they matter more than other awards.
And also, the Academy is disproportionately made up of actors.
So, if you ever wonder why movies that tend to be contemplative,
dialogue-driven character pieces that take place in Hollywood
are more likely to be nominated slash win than perhaps they deserve,
there you go.
But it wasn't always this way.
As a random for instance, let's look at the 1971 Oscars.
Of the five Best Picture nominees,
four of them had been in the top ten highest-grossing films of that year.
In 1975, three of the five Best Picture nominees
were in the top ten highest-grossing films.
By 1980, that number had dropped to two,
and it kind of stayed at this level until the 2000s.
By 2005, none of the five Best Picture nominees
even cracked the top 20 for domestic gross.
Same for 2006, the year that Crash won Best Picture.
Not one of the Best Picture nominees even cracked the top 20.
Both Star Wars and Jaws were nominated for Best Picture.
But after that, we started to see a slow divergence develop.
The films that most people saw got less and less awards recognition,
and awards recognition was used to boost attendance for smaller films
that people might not have seen otherwise.
There were exceptions.
But in terms of broader nominee trends,
most films started to follow a pattern.
Since the early 2000s, a somewhat predictable algorithm has emerged
for what type of film will get nominated.
Hell, two years before Kate Winslet won her Oscar for Best Actress,
she parodized how she planned on doing it in an episode of Extras.
No, I'm doing it because I've noticed that if you do a film about the Holocaust,
guaranteed an Oscar.
And then two years later, what do you know?
In terms of nominees, there's also a lot of money involved.
Promoting films for awards consideration costs money.
So, could one say that a trend of films being produced
intentionally featuring Oscar movie attributes has emerged?
That producers and studios are essentially gaming the system,
making movies with less attention to quality
than to features that Academy Award voters have shown preference for?
Yes, absolutely. Yes, absolutely.
People harp on Crash, and deservedly so,
but perhaps the most overt recent example of this phenomenon
is 2011's Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close,
a movie that nobody saw and nobody liked.
It had its elite property acquisition,
topical subject matter, mentally challenged child,
elite principals, including Academy favorite Tom Hanks,
but this movie got no other major film award nominations
from any other major group except for the Academy.
And it also has a Rotten Tomatoes score of 45%,
the worst score received by any Best Picture nominee
in Rotten Tomatoes history.
Producer Scott Rudin used methods that had worked for him previously
with No Country for Old Men and There Will Be Blood,
pushed a big four-year consideration campaign
that, yes, cost a lot of money and, what do you know,
Best Picture nomination, you know, for all the good it did.
So when did the studios begin to use the Oscars
as a means of marketing a newly released film
instead of the other way around?
Raaargh!
The Deer Hunter is, well, A, it's really long,
and B, it's really hard to watch.
When the movie was about ready to go,
the filmmakers had dropped a film on the studio
that was a critical darling but near impossible to market.
Hey, everyone, I know the Vietnam War just ended in disgrace
barely three years ago, but wanna watch Robert De Niro
and Christopher Walken suffer horribly for three hours?
So the producers had this great idea of,
hey, let's get in the absolute barest minimum requirement
for Oscar nominations for the following year,
namely a limited release in New York and LA
and also some other minor stuff,
and then go into wide release
after the nominations come out in January.
The winner is Christopher Walken in The Deer Hunter.
And lo and behold, success.
The film won five Academy Awards,
including Best Picture, Director and Supporting Actor for Walken.
And obviously, this did not change the industry overnight,
but over the next 30 years,
strategies like that used with The Deer Hunter
went from outliers to pretty much
all of the Oscar contenders reusing it,
especially in the actor categories.
In the following decades,
the more popular films that made lots of money
became less and less concerned with prestige
and more and more concerned with appealing
to as wide a demographic as possible.
As it turns out,
the masses don't really care about awards all that much.
Why wasn't The Dark Knight nominated for Best Picture?
The normies wondered.
Why was Wali relegated to the ghetto
that his best animated feature
instead of Best Picture like Beauty and the Beast was?
And yeah, this would kind of end up eventually backfiring
because the movies that got nominated
were seen by so few people
in the weeks and months leading up to the Oscars.
And viewership has been on a pretty even keel downward
since the 90s,
bottoming out in 2008 with its lowest ratings ever,
at which point the Academy was like,
yeah, we should probably include some more mainstream fare
in the Best Picture category
because no one is watching our show anymore
and we want to stay relevant.
The last time 10 films were nominated
for Best Picture was 1943.
In 2010, when they upped the Best Picture category
back to 10 as it was in the early days,
we got nominees like District 9 and Avatar,
a flaccid attempt to push back against
the Academy's own internal biases
concerning what is indeed awards-worthy.
That said, it's still mostly been the awards
as marketing movies that get nominated,
especially in the acting categories
with a few mass appeal ones sprinkled in there
for technical awards and Best Picture.
Though the fact that Mad Max Fury Road
was nominated this year for as many awards as it was,
granted mostly technical,
is a minor miracle unto itself.
And I'm honestly kind of surprised
that it was nominated for Best Picture.
So progress, eh.
So moving forward, there has been a lot of talk
about this Oscar bait strategy in recent weeks
and how it ties in with pushes for greater diversity,
especially, again, within the acting categories.
I mean, yeah, it would be great if it was a meritocracy
and yes, these 20 people just happened
to be the best choices that came out this year,
but come on, it's political
and the members of the Academy,
in terms of demographic, are a touch homogenous.
Academy membership is kind of like
being a Supreme Court justice.
It is lifelong and historically it has comprised
mostly of crusty old white guys,
even greater in proportion to the overwhelmingly male,
overwhelmingly white film industry as a whole.
So in a panicked move to outrun total irrelevance,
the Academy has announced that voting rights
will be limited to 10-year cycles.
If a member has not been active in the industry
within the last 10 years,
they will be moved to emeritus status,
meaning they can enjoy all the privileges of membership
except voting on the Oscars,
unless you won an Oscar.
That guarantees you lifetime voting privileges.
Needless to say, some of the olds in the Academy
are not happy about this.
Anyway, they've also pledged to double their minority
slash female membership by 2020,
which may sound like a lot until you remember,
again, this should not be difficult
even if you are trying to match proportion
to the industry's demographics, which are not great.
So you hear that meatloaf?
You better do another movie about truckers
if you want to keep voting.
It is my understanding that you'll do anything
for love, meatloaf.
Will you do that?
♪♪♪
♪♪♪
