When Men in Black became a surprise hit in 1997, it didn't yet have a sequel greenlit, or even written.
But that shouldn't have been a problem, right? Being based on a comic book?
It's the sort of thing that should work well with serialization.
If anything would lend itself to a franchise, it would be something like Men in Black.
Going to get your gun back, huh?
I like this gun.
But here's the problem. Men in Black 1 was an origin story.
The story of fish-out-of-water Agent J joining the eponymous organization.
The end of the film set up a sequel, sure, but it promised a different plot and different characters.
Agent J is no longer a greenhorn. Agent K, the mentor figure, has retired.
Agent L is now the new recruit. So given this setup, what did they decide to do for the sequel?
Okay, well, he's retired, right?
Well, they retconned the ending of the first movie, slotting Will Smith's Agent J back into the position of clueless noob to recreate that
sweet, sweet chemistry he had with Tommy Lee Jones.
Agent L is clumsily written out.
And plus, you can't count L. I mean, she wanted to go back to the morgue.
I just, I helped her.
Frank the Pug, who has a glorified cameo in the first movie, is now bumped up to lead character because fanservice.
I just walked in to find you here with that sad look upon your face.
And there's lots of these guys.
That's gonna leave a scar.
Men in Black 2 didn't build on what the first movie had set up. It just repeated its greatest hits.
And everybody hated it.
Any story can arguably, probably have a compelling sequel.
But unless it's a sort of episodic thing, like a superhero franchise, where by design,
it's more or less gonna have, like, the same conflict and characters each time,
in order for it to be a satisfying story, it should probably be different from that first one.
Expand on the world in some way.
And if that is what you're here for, I have a sequel that's out today.
It's called Truth of the Divine, it's a sequel to Axiom's End, and it is not the same.
Say what you want about it, it's different from the first one.
It is not Men in Black 2.
There, I got my plug out of the way. Seriously, it's my one thing.
You can buy it now, wherever books are sold, as long as you are in the US, UK, Canada, also English-speaking countries.
I don't get any say on the foreign rank.
But there are some stories that probably should just not have sequels.
Love Never Dies is the result of a decades-long attempt to take a fundamentally unworkable story and make it work.
This might also be the musical that was given the most chances of all big-budget musicals,
with productions in Toronto, London, Australia, and even a world tour,
which absolutely, yes, I went and saw, in the futile hope that audiences might take to it eventually.
At least an oomph of the degree to which they did Phantom of the Opera.
Phantom of the Opera is, by most meaningful metrics, the most successful musical of all time.
It has played to over 140 million people in 35 countries and 166 cities around the world,
with an estimated gross of $6 billion.
It has played over 12,000 performances across 30 years at Her Majesty's Theatre in London alone,
and is still the longest-running show on Broadway.
Suck it.
So just so we'll have a point of reference for what happens in Love Never Dies,
here is a brief summary of the stage version of Phantom of the Opera.
Phantom of the Opera!
Phantom of the Opera is the story of Christine, a young ingenue who wows Paris
after she falls into the role of surprise understudy
after the prima donna is scared off performing by the Phantom of the Opera.
After her gangbusters performance, we learn that Christine has been getting voice lessons from a mysterious tutor,
which her friend and extremely minor character Meg remarks upon.
I hear your voice in the darkness, yet the words aren't yours.
Remember Meg.
We'll come back to Meg.
So it turns out her secret mentor is actually that Phantom,
a supposed ghost who is actually a guy who's not only been extorting the managers,
but also screwing with the cast because it's fun and he hates the prima donna.
But this is a sexy Phantom C, and he's in love with her, and she's kind of into it,
but she's also kind of into her old flame Raoul, who is also rich and a vicomte.
So Raoul becomes the obvious choice once Christine sees the reason for his phantom-y ways, namely his face.
Hijinks and a love triangle ensue, the Phantom kills a few people,
and after basically taking the entire opera house hostage and forcing them to perform his opera,
Christine unmasks him on stage and he kidnaps her,
and the show ends with Raoul trying to rescue her but getting captured immediately,
after which the Phantom demands that Christine marry him or Raoul dies.
But when Christine shows him a moment of compassion and kisses him,
he realizes what an asshole he's been the whole show, and he lets the two of them go,
wishes them mazel, and an angry mob shows up, but he escapes,
and that extremely minor character, Meg, remember her,
picks up his mask and holds it up as the spotlight focuses on it, and the show ends.
Love Never Dies is the story of the Phantom having apparently learned no lessons,
still obsessing over Christine and plotting to lure and extort her into marrying him again.
Only he succeeds in his endeavor this time, but then he has to negotiate a hostage crisis,
which ends in Christine getting shot.
Or Love Never Dies is the story of Christine,
trapped in a loveless marriage to a negligent alcoholic gambling addict,
reconnecting with the serial killer who loved her and also kidnapped her ten years ago,
and deciding that he's actually the lesser of two evils,
until she gets shot by a former friend in a completely unrelated hostage crisis.
Or Love Never Dies is the story of Meg Giry,
whose mother dragged her across the ocean to Coney Island to work for the murderer
who'd been extorting the Paris Opera for some reason,
and who has been dying for said murderous extortionist's approval?
I was suddenly aware of a presence in the air, and I knew it was him.
Until one day when she realizes that he's never going to choose her over her former friend he's still obsessed with,
she kidnaps said friend's child with the apparent intention of doing a murder-suicide,
but ends up accidentally shooting her old friend instead.
It is perfect. I wouldn't change anything.
So there are some variations on this show's plot because they kept revising it and revising it,
trying to make it work, but I'm just going to summarize the nightmare that is most readily available.
The 2011 Melbourne production filmed for broadcast ten years ago.
It's a decade after the events of the first musical, and if you're wondering what he's been up to
and how his life has pivoted in a new exciting direction,
well, he's still whining and obsessing over Christine Daae in song form.
Just milking the giant cow to her portrait,
which is better than the West End version where he was doing it to a real doll.
But wake, only nothing but the cold.
Oh, Ramin, why?
We then cut to Coney Island where Alan Cumming, Harley Quinn, and Uncle Fester introduce us to
The Vibe, which I guess could be described as Cirque du Soleil by way of Tim Burton,
but not like, you know, good Tim Burton,
more like Disney whipped out a boatload of money to make Dumbo because what else is he gonna do, Tim Burton?
Let's get ready for Dumbo!
So this is the Phantom's show, fairground, whatever,
and he's rebranded himself as Mr. Y.
Mr. Y welcomes you to Phantasma!
And we learn that Meg Giri, remember her,
the ballerina with like ten lines from the first show,
is now the star of Mr. Y's sideshow through a song she performs.
If it's marvel and illusion that your soul and body crave,
you'll be leaving here content without a doubt!
Also, in-universe, the Phantom writes all of the songs for everything that happens under the Mr. Y umbrella,
so the Phantom wrote this.
Such a show you've never seen, such a show there's never been,
and today's not brand-new!
Anyway, she finishes the song, runs backstage to her mom, Madam Giri, who is also here,
and is like, I hope Phantom Senpai notices me because everybody wants to fuck this asshole now!
And mom is like, no, Senpai is never going to notice you, sweetie.
And then we get an exposition dump explaining how the Giri smuggled the Phantom out of France
and went with him to New York for...
I'm sure a very good reason.
Who concealed him safe away?
Smuggled him up to Calais?
Found a freighter out of France?
We never learn it, but I'm sure it makes perfect sense.
Meg learns Christine is coming to New York and the audience is also reminded that Meg and Christine were friends at one point.
Meg is nostalgic, Madam Giri is like, oh no, I don't like this.
I don't see the problem, this is ancient history.
The Phantom shows up randomly in Lears to remind the audience that there are Phantoms in this Phantom.
We then cut to a dock in New York and Christine Daae serving real Kate Winslet in Titanic realness.
We learn that she and Raoul are married and have a kid named Gustav,
but the money's tight because Raoul, turns out, is a gambler and an alcoholic.
Oh yeah, and our art is paying off your gambling debts is what they're saying in France.
And he drank away all their money, just like in all the fanfics.
Father dear, come play with me, come and see this toy I've got.
What a snob at most.
I can't explain it, but it was just a weirdly popular fanfic trope back in 2002.
And I guess Andrew Lloyd Webber spent some time on fanfiction.net.
AO3 didn't exist yet.
Is it true you left your entire fortune on a roulette table in Monte Carlo?
How am I supposed to feel in this moment?
Ganja, I didn't want to make it that everybody was attacking you.
You insolent jackals, how dare you?
I feel very attacked!
Relax, relax.
So Christine is here at the invitation of Oscar Hammerstein and Raoul is a bad dad.
Doesn't he love me?
No, he does not.
So Uncle Fester, Alan Cumming, and Harley Quinn show up in the Nightmare Mobile
and they take the fam to the hotel.
While Raoul drinks some more and Christine sings a very thinly veiled number about how she clearly made the wrong choice.
Gustav goes to bed and then who breaks down the door like the Kool-Aid man?
Oh yeah!
And then...
Once there was a light beneath a moonless sky.
Okay, so how do I explain this?
And I touched you.
And I felt you.
And I heard those ravishing replays.
This is basically like an 8 minute dirge about how at the end of the last show,
after Christine escaped with Raoul,
she immediately came right back to the Phantom to confess her love.
They have sex.
Despite his virgin status,
he hits it and quits it like 30 times in one night.
Again and again and again.
Stamina.
Stamina.
And I held you.
And I touched you.
And embraced you.
And I felt you.
And I caught you.
And I kissed you.
And I took you.
And I begged you with a knee.
To urge you to deny.
8 minutes.
Again and again and again.
Cosmopolitan's top 10 positions to try beneath a moonless sky.
So then after that 8 minutes, they move to the balcony and have another 5 minute ballad about nothing.
And then Gustav shows up.
And we get this amazing reaction shot.
Oh, shh, Gustav, it's alright, darling.
And because the Phantom is an asshole, he Michael Jackson's the kid,
and then threatens to disappear the child if Christine doesn't perform at his side show.
Why does he wear a mask, mother?
Is he a magician?
Yes, darling. In his way.
He's an asshole.
And so she's like, okay.
But then she reads it and she's like, oh boy, but his music is just so good.
So then we get to the notes portion of the show,
which is basically just a carbon copy of the same thing in the original show.
In this version, Christine, Raoul, Meg, and Madame Jury reconnect.
They all kind of figure out what's going on.
Meg goes single, white, female, learning that Christine is there to sing on the Phantom's invite.
Raoul realizes that them coming to America was a ruse engineered by the Phantom.
It's him.
Him.
That's what I said.
You work for him.
Now you do too.
Oh, shit! Oh, shit!
And everyone's fine with it, I guess.
No one is going to bring up that he killed people.
So Christine is doing what the Phantom asked,
but he lures the child to his lair at the base of a roller coaster anyway
to his, I guess, doom.
But then the kid starts playing chopsticks on his piano
and the Phantom starts doing middle school punnett squares in his head like,
oh my, a virtuoso.
And he makes this connection.
He's just ten years old.
Ten years old.
And then...
You can feel it.
Yes.
Come closer.
Yes.
Have no fear of the beauty underneath.
You can face it.
Yes.
You can take it.
Yes.
Can we please stop talking to the ten year old like that, please?
You'll accept it.
Yes.
You'll embrace it.
Yes.
I don't think you like it.
Well, why not?
I like this new generation of music.
You'll accept it.
Yes.
You'll embrace it.
Yes.
Let me show you.
Mother of God, it's all toilet sounds.
Yes.
Let me show you the beauty of God.
So it turns out Gustav can't take the beauty underneath.
So the Phantom does the same heel face turn he does at the end of the first show
and just kind of accepts it and lets him go.
Only where in the first show, his change of heart is precipitated by Christine showing
him compassion and making out with him.
In this show, it's precipitated by nothing.
The kid screams at his horrible deformity, showing that no, actually, I don't accept
you no matter what.
And the Phantom takes from this, oh man, I was being a huge asshole again, wasn't I?
And then Christine is just suddenly there and he's like, oh, silly me being an asshole
again.
My bad.
You guys can go.
Just don't tell your kid I'm actually his dad.
And she's like, no, sir, I honor my contracts.
I am nothing if not a professional.
And I will sing your music because she needs to beef up her LinkedIn.
And so she leaves and the Phantom, again, precipitated by nothing, is like, I will give
everything I have to this miracle child who can play heart and soul.
And then he leaves.
And then the real villain shows up.
And it's Madame Jury, who is angry because she seems to have expected to inherit his
wealth.
Ten dark years of toil and tears.
And now what we've worked for will go to that child.
Even though they appear to be about the same age.
And that's the end of Act One.
Please clap.
So here is where we begin Act Two, where love never dies bucks musical theater tradition
by trading off a rousing, high energy act opener that gets you invested and gets the
blood pumping with this.
One more.
Buddy, don't you think you had enough?
All right.
One more drink, sir.
That's what I need.
Don't you think so?
So here's day drunk Raoul sitting at a bar giving us low tempo B side of a mid 2000s
Tom Waits album energy, complete with a boozy saxophone.
Beneath this mask I wear, there's nothing of me.
Why does she love me?
She does not.
Then Meg just shows up and establishes that she likes the ocean and its inherent eroticism
and how sometimes she just has thoughts about, I don't know, walking straight into it.
Sink into the sea, blue and cool and kind.
Then we get to this.
He's just another circus freak.
I'm not afraid of him.
Surprise, bitch.
So this dick waving contest happens and the Phantom and Raoul waste no time going behind
Christine's back to make a bet.
If she doesn't sing the song, the Phantom will then go and pay off their debts.
And if she does, then she belongs to him.
She walks.
You leave together.
Pockets full.
Debts paid.
She sings.
You leave alone.
Whatever that means.
And if you thought Christine lacked agency in the first show, well.
So Raoul is an idiot and agrees, because we need to add stakes and there's like 45 minutes
left in this show and still no plot.
Then absolutely nothing happens between the bet and the culmination of the bet.
Well, except for this.
Bathing Beauty on the beach.
Bathing Beauty, say hello.
Again, in-universe, the Phantom wrote this.
And after we're done, Meg's like,
No!
No!
What, he didn't watch me sing Bathing Beauty's?
I had quick change.
All that you gave him has all been a waste.
All that you've done, it has all been erased.
Anyway, on to the culmination of that riveting drunken bet.
Gustaf's like, Mom, I love you, as she looks into the middle distance longing for death.
Raoul shows up, begs Christine not to sing, and gives enough of a rat's ass to comb his
hair and wear a coat for once, but of course does not tell her what he did.
Don't sing the song, dear.
What?
You have to know something's terribly wrong, dear.
Someone drove a hotdog-shaped car through the window!
Come on, whoever did this, just confess.
We promise we won't be mad.
Then the Phantom shows up and does a Billy Zane, the Duke in Moulin Rouge necklace scene
to assert his natural dominance.
Only in those scenes where the necklace functions as a metaphorical collar, chaining them to
a rich guy that they do not love, here we're supposed to root for this guy?
Let me hear you sing once more!
Is it because Kate Winslet is going to pick Billy Zane this time?
Our hero?
Consummate professional that she is, she dresses up in her iconic peacock, the symbol of...
I don't know.
And she sings the song.
So then Raoul peaces out, and the scene that all the cat moms in the audience have been
waiting for for 30 years, the...
No wait, there's still another 15 minutes.
Gustav.
What is it?
Gustav!
What's wrong?
I told him to wait for Raoul!
Oh no, where's Gustav?
That jealous Madame Giry must have taken him.
Anyway, Madame Giry wasn't the real villain of the show.
It was Meg.
Yo, what is that?
A tattoo.
It's my old high school team.
The Plainview Red Herrings.
Look at it swim.
Who has now kidnapped Gustav, and is about to toss him and herself off a pier because
she's just so lonely, and Senpai won't notice her.
Always wondered how to make you watch, well watch me now!
And the Phantom only wants Christine, even though Meg has ostensibly been forced into
sex work to raise funds for him?
Dot dot dot question mark.
I gave what they would take.
I gave what they would take.
I gave it for your sake.
So the whole gang shows up and tries to talk Meg down, and then Meg throws them the child
bit.
Oh shit, look out, she's got a gun!
No, Meg, don't!
So this show ends with the Phantom of the Opera negotiating a hostage crisis.
Give me the gun, Meg.
Give me the gun, said the Phantom of the Opera.
The Phantom then deploys his hostage negotiation skills, which aren't that sharp, turns out.
He says this.
We can't all be like Christine.
Christine?
Oh, it's Christine!
So Christine dies, but at least the Phantom gets a consolation child.
Boy and man hug, kid's okay with his face now, apparently, even though his mother just
bled out in front of him.
Raoul just stands there with Christine's corpse.
And I cannot wait for the CBS sitcom around these two and a half men.
The end.
So...
Why is this?
In a post-Phantom world in the late 80s, early 90s, you have all these Broadway producers
trying to replicate Phantom's success.
Oh, God!
Oh!
From Disney's Beauty and the Beast, to Miss Saigon, to that one Batman cover.
But there was also the possibility of film adaptations for Phantom itself.
In 1989, Warner Brothers buys the movie rights and Grand Central Lloyd Webber total artistic
control, and Lord Andy handpicks a young Joel Schumacher to direct the film, based on how
much he enjoyed the vampire film The Lost Boys.
Anyway, shooting is set to go, with Michael Crawford and Sarah Brightman reprising their
roles.
But then...
Andrew Lloyd Webber and Sarah Brightman divorce in 1990.
Not long after the divorce, Lord Andy and Phantom designer Maria Bjornsson were having
conversations about what a Phantom sequel would look like.
Webber wanted it to take place in Manhattan, with said Phantom living in New York's first
penthouse, but changed his mind after watching a documentary about the Brooklyn Beach and
Fairground and thought, hey, how about Coney Island?
So then he has dinner with Frederick Forsythe.
Now, Frederick Forsythe is a name you might be familiar with.
He's a best-selling thriller author from England, and Brexit supporter, who is still publishing
books as recently as 2018.
So I guess you could see where a man who makes his career writing thriller mysteries from
a journalistic bent would make him a natural fit for writing a sequel to Phantom.
So Lord Andy goes up to Frederick Forsythe and tells him, okay, so I'm going to unofficially
commission you to write my Phantom sequel, and I want you to include this, this, this,
and this, and set it mostly at Coney Island.
And Frederick Forsythe is like, okay.
And he writes this concept.
And then he finishes it, and he brings it to Lord Andy, and Lord Andy is like,
huh.
I guess you sure did give me what I asked for.
Okay, so in order to understand why Love Never Dies is the way it is, I am going to need
to give you a plot summary of Frederick Forsythe's The Phantom of Manhattan.
So in Phantom of Manhattan, Eric is an impresario millionaire in New York City, having worked
his way up from Coney Island engineer in a clown mask, building roller coasters, to owning
half the city.
He has accomplished this by being a super genius, and also teaming up with this random
Persian sidekick named Darius, who worships Mamun, the god of gold, who is real.
And Mamun has granted Eric powers, and good fortune to achieve millionarity.
Now Eric wants to open a new opera house in New York City, but gasp, so does Esker Hammerstein.
What bad timing.
And he has actual historical soprano Melba as his prima donna, so what's Eric going
to do?
The only way he can make sure his opera is a winner in the great opera house race is
to bring Christine over from Europe to be his prima donna.
Eric has written an opera about a disfigured war veteran that he wants Christine to star
in.
He will conveniently switch places with the bandaged-faced vet to sing with her, and there's
also conveniently a child role that her son will get to take later too.
Also, in this version, her son's name is Pierre.
We know from the beginning of the book that Christine's son can't be Raoul's, because
before they ever even met, Raoul got his dick shot off by performing a heroic deed in Paris.
And everyone was so sad for him, thinking no woman would ever want to marry him, but
lucky for him, Christine got knocked up by guess who, and she needs a husband, everybody
wins.
So Raoul is actually super sweet and self-sacrificing in this book, if a bit of a dullard, and he
can't speak English, so he spends the whole book being confused and French.
As they come over from Europe, the boy has a tutor who is an Irish priest who has literal
conversations with God.
Much of the narration is done by a smarmy New York City reporter who's getting the
scoop on the opera house race, as well as narration from the Irish priest, Eric's
evil sidekick, and a random street urchin character?
And of course Eric himself, who begins the book explaining why Gaston Leroux was a hack
idiot, and Andrew Lloyd Webber was the correct version, actually.
Looking at his original text today, frankly one is in a quandary.
The basic idea is there, and it is brilliant, but the way poor Gaston tells it is a mess.
Much more bewildering, Leroux tells his entire story without ever giving a date when it happened.
For an investigative reporter, which he purports to be, this is a bizarre omission.
But far and away the most bizarre departure by Leroux from even the most basic rules of
investigation and reporting is his end of book seduction by a mysterious character known
only as the Persian.
This strange mountebank is briefly mentioned twice in the first two thirds of the story,
and in a most passing manner.
Yet after the abduction of-
He appears also to have made an error with the position, appearance, and intelligence
of Madame Giry, and they were corrected in the Lloyd Webber musical.
This is the story of the Lloyd Webber musical, and it is the only one to make sense.
What do you think?
It stinks.
When Christine arrives, Eric sends a monkey music box, because this is a sequel to the musical,
to her hotel, which she immediately recognizes and realizes what's going on.
Eric invites her to a Coney Island maze of mirrors to tell her what's up and confesses his love.
I love you, bitch.
Oh my god.
I ain't gonna never stop loving you, bitch.
She flees, hijinks ensue.
Eventually the opera opens, and they perform his opera, and it's so romantic.
The priest and the reporter characters are trying to figure out what's going on with the evil Persian sidekick,
and then after the opera, this evil Persian sidekick invites Christine to the park so he can kill her,
or maybe just lure Eric there to kill him, because he's evil like that.
But his reason is because Eric has forsaken his worship of mamal,
which in Farsi actually means mother.
And the sidekick must kill the non-believer or something.
Anyway, Christine dies, Eric kills his sidekick, they tell the kid Eric is his dad,
Raoul's very cool about this, the Irish priest is chill, the reporter gets his scoop,
and then Eric lives happily ever after with his son in, like, this deformed people's community.
The end.
So although Lord Andy was not interested in pursuing the sequel stage show at first,
he never really lets the idea go.
Rather emboldened by the 2004 movie's... success?
Steep as hell!
Existence? What do you even call this? I don't know.
In a Daily Mail interview from 2007, Webber confirmed that the stage sequel is still on his mind.
It's taken me ten years to decide to do this, and I want to base it on the ideas I had with Freddy Forsythe years ago
for something called The Phantom of Manhattan that came out as a book.
There are various things in the plotting that I'm not very happy with, and I think I've solved them.
I hope we can sort them out, but I'm really pretty buzzed up about it.
So in 2007, Lloyd Webber approaches friend, previous collaborator, and successful playwright-slash-screenwriter Ben Elton
We have a lot in common. I think we're like Mickey Rooney and Judy Garland.
We want to do the show right now. I don't know which is which. I don't know who's got the better legs.
to rework the ideas that Webber and Forsythe had developed a decade earlier.
And then he decides that the real problem is...
It was he who found the way through the roadblock.
He pointed out that my first thoughts for a new plot contained several new characters.
Ben suggested that any continuation of the story must be about the protagonists of the original show.
So the new characters were axed, and Gustav Christine's son is the only new principal character we meet.
Come the autumn of 2007, Ben had shaped a story that I felt I could make work.
Oh.
Give me the gun, Meg!
So they kept more or less the same tension in Antagonist,
and just searched to replace the evil Persian with Madame and Meg Giry.
Well, I guess that makes sense. Madame Giry replaced the original Persian in the original show,
so why can't she just replace the evil Persian too?
So they set it up where you think the antagonist is going to be Madame Giry,
who also really has no reason at all to feel like this,
and is already an incredibly weak motivation going forward.
All would be ours if that bastard had never been born!
Why did you think he was going to leave everything to you?
Did he say he was going to? Is he terminally ill?
Because he appears to be about your age, Madame.
So giving Madame Giry and Meg something like Darius's motivation from the original book,
which was stupid but followed its own logic, makes this ending even worse.
Giry still has the evil Persian's same motivation.
She still wants his millionarity.
But based on what? Where the hell does this come from?
She never seemed motivated by money, not in the first show and not in the second either.
And this is to say nothing of the logic of the Giry's being here at all.
Who concealed him safe away? Smuggled him up to Calais?
We grafted Forsyth's weird plot onto old characters from the first show who have no reason to be here, so...
Give me the gun, Meg!
So this new version drops all of the new characters that Forsyth added,
like the priest, the reporter, and the evil Persian,
and hews closer to characters already established in the first show.
But not without keeping some key elements, like Christine's love child with the phantom.
And the whole runs a freak show despite having been held captive in a freak show,
but I guess it's a humane freak show now?
Hurt people hurt people, I guess.
And I'd be tempted to say that at least some of this was a good artistic move moving away from that book,
but the results, man...
You can face it. Yes!
You can take it. Yes!
Also, this show wants us to root for Eric and Christine.
And in earlier versions, apparently it didn't shy away as much from the fact that he was, you know, a murderer.
But in the final version, it has to totally ignore half of the first show to make its stupid romance work.
The juries treat him like he's just some guy.
You work for him!
Now you do too!
This man has killed several people.
Everyone just kind of politely ignores everything he did in the first one,
except for his fixation on Christine.
She chose road, chose to make a new start.
Chose beauty and youth over genius and art.
Or my favorite little writing detail, the one song that is repeated from the first show.
Twisted every way, what answer can I give?
I know I can't refuse, and yet I wish I could.
Here is that song from the first musical without that crucial line cut.
He kills without a thought, he murders or that's good.
I know I can't refuse.
Hmm, feels like that might be kind of a deal breaker.
So, let's be honest, the ending of this show is pretty hilarious.
Christine! Oh, it's Christine!
Oh, does Christine get killed?
Yes!
Oh!
Amazing! Amazing!
So what is the main tension of Love Never Dies?
Well, this verse is also same as the first.
What will become of the Phantom and Christine?
Who will she choose?
But that tension resolves after she sings her peacock dress, so the main plot is tied up.
But that doesn't end the story.
The random thing has to happen.
Gustav. What is it?
Gustav! What's wrong?
I told him to wait for Raoul.
Before he asked me to. Surely he wouldn't.
The Phantom never at any point interacts with Meg before the end of the show.
The Phantom at never any point interacted with Meg in the first show.
If a tragic thing happens at the end of a story, fine, great.
But it needs to both come out of and influence the actions of our protagonist.
And while, sure, Meg was in the show before this,
this isn't like some dad who never went to Timmy's baseball games and now Timmy's gone off the edge.
Always wondered how to make you want to watch me now.
We don't know anything about what their relationship even is.
We don't know how he treats her. For all we know, this is like a fatal attraction scenario.
But while you could argue that this was set up, sort of, like they tried to,
they can't bring themselves to make the Phantom legitimately fuck them over in order to get with Christine.
So this?
I took a little trip to Coney Island.
I took a little trip because of you.
Never makes sense. He never wrongs them in any way that we actually see.
I hope Christine is worthy of you.
I hope her singing makes up for what your blindness has done to Meg.
They just feel entitled to his stuff.
The Phantom pedestalizing Christine could, in a different story, lead to some kind of downfall,
but not here. Meg feels owed by him,
but the show never gives us any indication that her feelings are justified.
And either way, Meg is not, like, his ward. She's, like, at least 30.
Man, Sherry Lewis has got it going on.
In no universe is this man responsible for what she is doing right now,
and it's weird to imply that he is.
Give me the blame for not seeing the things that you've done, Meg.
This is some poetic, thematic culmination.
All his ghosts come back to haunt him.
There could have been a story where he throws all the people who helped him
when he very much did not deserve it under the bus because of his obsession with Christine,
but the show doesn't do that because it wants the audience to root for these crazy kids.
And I cannot overstate this.
This is a fundamentally unsalvageable relationship.
We should not be rooting for them.
In this very show, he threatened to murder a child.
That perfect specimen may disappear on Coley Island.
You know what you do? You buy yourself a tape recorder,
you just record yourself for a whole day.
I think I'm going to be surprised at some of your phrasing.
And only walked it back when he realized the kid was actually his crotch dumpling.
He plays like me.
So the tragic ending isn't poetic.
It isn't the result of some mistake the Phantom actually made, and he has made many.
This isn't his past or his character flaws coming back to haunt him.
It's not him burning everything down if he can't get what he wants.
It's just a random thing.
You know, the funny thing about Empire Strikes Back when it first came out
is it was actually kind of met with mixed reviews from critics and even from fans.
And I think part of the reason for that is because people were so used to sequels
more or less kind of following the same pattern as first ones.
And the Empire Strikes Back is pretty different from the first Star Wars movie.
But it didn't take long for Empire Strikes Back to be re-evaluated as the good one.
Arguably the best one of all of the ones that have been produced.
And generally when you look at sequels that are seen as positively,
even maybe even better than the first one,
it's probably because they try new things.
They expand on the world.
They introduce new characters.
They take the story in a different direction.
Because presumably your characters have grown since that first story.
Phantom of the Opera ends with him letting Christine go.
And the reason that the musical is more compelling than most other versions
is because it's one of the only ones where that happens.
Where he voluntarily kind of sees the error of his ways and lets her go.
Why undo the thing that made your first show work in the first place?
So you could say that Love Never Dies is a story for the ages
about the need to recapture lightning in a bottle.
A story of being unable to let go of the past.
But at the same time I strain to think of this as a cynical lazy cash grab
in the vein of Men in Black 2.
It's just so, I don't know, sincere?
Andrew Lloyd Webber wanted this to work.
And moreover, you can't say that there was no care or passion here.
Just look at the costumes and the sets.
The costumes in particular are arguably better than the ones from Phantom of the Opera.
Because Phantom of the Opera 1 is so melodramatic and loud and high emotions,
and because I strain to see a scenario where a Phantom of the Opera sequel
that includes the Phantom and Christine doing the same shit they did in the first one,
not being a complete trash fire.
I just, I can't imagine any sequel to that version of Phantom of the Opera
being anything but, just, you can't look away from it.
It is just going to inevitably be captivating.
It is baffling. It is bad from start to finish.
But it is also eminently watchable.
And for that, I can't say I hate it.
I love the shit out of Love Never Dies.
You might say my love for Love Never Dies never dies.
As you know, my single, my single is dropping, it's dropping.
But of course, there are also many Phantom sequels and retellings out there.
They don't necessarily have to take the form of a stage show.
My favorite sequel is a fanfic that was published by some mysterious author like 10 years ago.
There's books, and also, there's audiobooks.
Hi, did you know that this is not a conflict of interest?
I was surprised too.
But either way, I get to promote my new audiobook, Truth of the Divine,
by way of our sponsor, Audible.
A lot of people have asked, is Abigail Thorne from Philosophy Tube coming back for the sequel?
The answer to that is yes.
And best of all, you can get it for free if you visit audible.com
or text Lindsay Ellis to 500-500 and start your 30-day free trial today.
Audible members get one credit every month,
good for any title in the entire premium selection of bestsellers, new releases,
regardless of price, and you keep them forever.
Want to let a friend or relative know that you're thinking about them?
Share the gift of Audible with others.
This is actually the copy.
So they can be inspired, informed, or entertained.
No, I did not write that.
So visit audible.com slash Lindsay Ellis or text Lindsay Ellis to 500-500
to start your 30-day free trial.
And you can get both Axiom's End and Truth of the Divine,
which is out now on Audible,
or a hard copy wherever books are stoled.
Oh, she thick.
♪
♪
♪
♪
♪
♪
♪
♪
♪
♪
♪
♪
♪
♪
♪
♪
♪
♪
