Oh, they did that part. What's this? Oh, there we go. There we go. Hello
Hey, how's it going? Hey, I'm well, how are you all? It's hello. It's fantastic to meet you
Would you like to introduce yourself in case some people don't know who you are?
Hello. Hello. Hello. Yes
I gotcha
Um, what's up, would you like to introduce yourself? I'm sure chat chat is going wild they know who you are, but
I need to know
Of course everyone. My name is Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. I am the congresswoman for New York's 14th Congressional District
Thank you so so much
Today
Thank you, thank you to Chelsea for giving me the heads up and inviting me. Oh gosh, I committed so much voter fraud for you
It's amazing it's it's Wow
How is it going over there? The government is like shut down
Longest shut down in history. The government is currently shut down. It's the longest shut down in American history
our
TSA airport workers are not getting paid our FDA food inspectors are not getting paid
we have
Folks showing up to NASA that are not paid and they're showing up for free just to keep you know
Basic vital systems to keep our astronauts alive
You know continuing and so it's kind of a mess right now
And we're we're doing everything that we can
Well
Keep keep fighting. I think what you're doing is phenomenal and I'm glad that the the Democrats haven't
caved because it's a big thing to cave on and it's
It's good
yeah, absolutely, and it's an issue because
Regardless of whether it's for a wall or for anything else
The whole point is that if we caved on this no matter what the request was
Then we're basically legitimizing the tactic of holding people's paychecks hostage and then they can do it again whenever they want. Yeah, exactly
For any agenda point. Yeah, I mean
It's not only that but like now we're like
We're now kids are yelling
You know build a wall to like indigenous people and like clear that you know
It's just this this whole wall notion is just a symbol for something else. Yeah, absolutely
That's absolutely it's a gigantic monument to white supremacy effectively. Exactly
Exactly and it's just you know
I I applaud you all for the organizing that you're doing because the best way that we fight against tactics like that is not just
resistance but by
Actively supporting and advancing the communities that that need advocacy the most so I really appreciate you and everyone who's joining you today
Yeah
Did you think that it was gonna get to this point I
couldn't I
Maybe have fantasized about anything remotely like this ever happening in my life and
Even they have not compared to what has happened. It's been amazing and
Just Wow, could I get you to say trans rights?
Pardon me. Yes, could I say trans rights, please? I know there's a lot of people in the chat who would love to hear it
Trans rights. Absolutely. It's a it's a no-brainer trans rights or civil rights or human rights
Thank you so much I've actually got a question to kind of bounce off of that
So you have done an absolutely stellar job over the last just a few weeks couple, you know
barely barely a month
taking the 70% tax rate and turning it from an abstract concept into a
specific policy that the public understands and
Yeah
Is is there anything on the docket in terms of like trans policy making use of that same that same momentum to
Help the public understand actionable
policy goals for
Trans rights. Mm-hmm. I think that's an excellent question
It's a it's it's an interesting one as well because when we're talking about
Actually just fighting for equal protection
It's it's not as though we're trying to advance a specific policy as much as it is
We're trying it's more of I feel like a lot of the times. It's the war that we're having is a cultural one
Much more than just the more than a marginal tax rate is
so what we really need to do and show I think which
which I think we're starting to do is
have this conversation a lot more in our culture and so
You know for so long. I would say that Democrats in the United States have operated from a defensive
place for a very very long time and
And what we're what we're doing is just kind of going on the offensive
Like I just tweeted today that in the United States
We wouldn't have to talk about bathrooms at all. If everyone just washed their hands and minded their own business
Amazing what an idea
and so so I think that that a lot of what we need to do is put things into perspective, but also
Continue to reassert that equal rights means equal rights. It doesn't matter
Who you are. It doesn't matter what you're wearing. It doesn't matter how you identify
and
You know in terms of legislation we can we can legislate protections or legislate, you know
And this is actually a question that we've had recently not just specifically to the trans community, but there was a
There was legislation that a Democrat was trying to propose
that was essentially a protection for our immigrant community and
but it was a constitutional protection, I believe and so
We actually didn't didn't co-sponsor it and we pushed we actually pushed back on it because introducing
Legislation that's that pretty much already reasserts what's in the Constitution makes it feel like it's up for debate
Like if as if they well said
Right if they voted for the for the if they voted down the law
It would almost make the constitutional guarantees seem less valid. Yeah, and so we actually pushed back against it
even though that it may seem kind of like a
twisted logic or counterintuitive of sorts
But but we actually pushed back against it because we said we don't want to have a debate about what is already settled
Once you once you put that stuff up for discussion it
Yes
Exactly. And so really what what I think we have to reassert is that when we say that equal rights for all
We mean equal rights for all no asterisk exceptions fine print nothing
Is so fantastic to hear and I'm glad we got you on I'd love to talk more about trans rights and
Tax rate, but I would also do you I need to ask do you know how to turn on the power in?
Frantic factory in Donkey Kong 64 because I've been I've been here for hours and I don't know
Do not I'm sorry Donkey Kong 64 is
Outside of my wheelhouse. Well, that's okay. I'm your wheelhouse is really really good
I just you know, you've lost my vote. No, no, this is
Please continue. I never owned an n64 though. I do think it's probably the best system out of all of them. I
Never owned an n64, but I used to go to my cousin's house all the time and she had Super Mario 64
Pokemon snap and probably a handful of other things. Yes
That's probably all I know how to play
Pokemon snap was fantastic. Please what you're saying was really important. I said that that was a poor taste joke
Please please do continue
Yeah, I just I just want to say that like one of the biggest things that I find with the community
Like for me personally, it's like house is like the issues the biggest issues that we face or housing and health care
Yeah
Yeah
Yeah, absolutely
Isn't uniting behind
Single single issue things that only affect them. It's a single issue thing that affects absolutely everyone
Yeah, that's that's right. And that's when we have these conversations about intersectionality that are so important because
You know
The the trans community does face a crisis when it comes to housing and health care
Like most people especially most Americans do except there's an added except when you have the added layer of discrimination
It makes these issues much more
acute in their crises than they usually are on average for other people and so
so it's important that we that we do talk about these issues in the economic frame, but not let go of the fact that
That discrimination is is a core reason for the economic
Hardship well said
Well, that's that I'm sorry, I'm here so quickly, but I just wanted to pop in and say hello I do need to head out
Extremely short question just before you know, okay. Have you seen the AOC dances Twitter account? I have seen the
We had them
Yeah
It's great, I haven't seen all the tweets but I there was one I miss the classic what's the song what's the song
I'm trying to remember. It's the 80s song
You can dance if you want to the LM safety dance
Well chat is losing their minds, thank you so so so much for stopping by of course
Of course made it a phenomenal weekend for many people. I'm so glad. Thank you for doing this work
I really appreciate it. Everyone appreciates it. No, thank you. Thank you for doing your work. And thank you
See you on TV, I'm so
I've been a bit quiet now, but I just I'm you
Alexandria you are giving a lot of people a lot of hope right now. Thank you, and I
Really don't have anything to ask but just I just wanted to say that I'm kind of shaking
No reason to shake
Thank you, thank you so so very much and I'm so happy that
That you know, the movement isn't all just about one person either. It's that we can have these spontaneous
Joyous and supportive moments and any one of us can can be responsible and be the source of it
So I thank you all so much and have an amazing day
Thank you. Bye. Bye
Rights, that's right
