The main video is talking about a genetic breeding model of how to make machines learn.
This method is simpler to explain or just show.
Here's a machine learning to walk or play Mario or jump real high.
A genetic code is an older code but it still checks out
and I personally suspect in the future genetic models will have a resurgence as compute power approaches crazy paths.
However, the current hotness is deep learning and recursive neural networks
and that's where the linear algebra really increases and explainability in a brief video really decreases.
But if I had to kind of explain how they work in a footnote just for the record, it's like this.
No infinite warehouse, just one student.
TeacherBot has the same test but this time BuilderBot is Dial Adjustment Bot
where each dial is how sensitive one connection in the student bot's head is.
There's a lot of connections in its head so a lot of dials.
A lot a lot.
TeacherBot shows StudentBot a photo and Dial Adjustment Bot adjusts that dial stronger or weaker
to get StudentBot closer to the answer.
It's a bit like adjusting the dial on a radio.
Is that still a thing? Do cars have radios still?
I don't know. Anyway, you might not know the exact frequency of the station
but you can tell if you're getting closer or further away.
It's like that but with a hundred thousand dials and a lot of math.
And that's just for one test question.
When TeacherBot introduces the next photo, Dial Adjustment Bot needs to adjust all the dials
so that StudentBot can answer both questions.
As the test gets longer, this becomes an insane amount of math and fine-tuning for Dial Adjustment Bot.
But when it's done, there's a StudentBot who can do a pretty good job at recognizing new photos
though still suffers from some of the problems mentioned in the main video.
Anyway, that's the most baby's first introduction to neural networks you will ever hear.
If it sounds interesting to you and you like math and code, go dig into the details.
Machines that learn are the future of everything.
Maybe quite literally the future of everything.
And given what we put them through, may the bots have mercy on us all.
Thank you for watching!
