So welcome back to Show of Almost Being Renamed. We're almost there, guys. We're almost there.
We're almost there. I promise, I'm not. We'll keep dragging it out. Final episode. Never
have to commit. No, no, no. We have to save it to episode 9. Yeah, that's when everything
happens. Well, fuck Rubble. We're on 4 of season 2, so jesus. Yeah, this isn't really
Tyrell-inspired, but I found it and it sounded good. Yeah. So it's got gin. It's got a lavender
and sage-infused white vermouth. This is what we like to call an effort cocktail. It has
gin in it. It's worth it. Yeah, it's gotta be worth it. It's got really, really expensive
gin. But since this is a booze and books show, that expensive gin is a tax write-off. Cheers!
So here's what happened last week, or the show that aired last week, which we shot like
two weeks ago. We had decided on a title, which will be one of the finals we're about
to mention, and after testing it with a few people, realized that these publishing terms
that we throw around are not generally known to the populace, even writers, which surprised
me quite a bit. So we decided maybe we don't have this in the bag, and we'll take it back
to you! Yeah, we'll announce some finalists and see how it rolls. This one is not a finalist,
but I thought it was funny. Winged Beast called it Hemingway Outsourcing, which is
completely appropriate, because we do the drinking, you do the writing. Hey! Distended
Livers. Odengo Otama offered Flask Fiction, which has a good alliterative ring to it.
But again, it was like our focus group of one didn't get the pun. But the thing is,
you don't have to get the pun to get that. It includes booze and fiction. That is absolutely
true. So I like it. Which is in contrast to my personal favorite, courtesy of Ronka, which
was The Lush Pile, which is of course a take on the term slush pile, which is, for those
of you who don't know, because apparently most people don't, is just the term that they
use for any group of unsolicited manuscripts. It's considered a slush pile. It doesn't mean
they're being rejected, it just means they're unsolicited and probably unagented. So I like
that a lot because it includes the word lush, and it's kind of funny. But people don't seem
to know what a slush pile is, so that's a problem. Other finalists for the choosing
was one from Morgan, Spirited Discussions. Yeah, that one gets to kind of the heart of
the matter, but it's much more sedate. It's not very oomph-y. Despair suggested Cosmopolitan,
and then boom. Like, done. I wrote it down because I think I liked the boom. I thought
that you were just like, this is it. No, that was not my boom. Okay. Elliott Hochberg gave
us 451 proof. Lachlan Cartland offered us first draft, which I really like. Spelled
like, yeah, like, like, not, not, not, not, yeah, not, um, and I also offered pros and
cons. Clever girl. Yeah, I like that first one, first draft. Becca M, she gave us top
shelf, which I like a lot, except for I think that might be too classy. Yeah, that is really
I mean, we make effort cocktails. Yeah, yeah, this is, this is like the rare time when we
effort, but we ourselves are not classy. We say words like, like, fuck, and motherfucker,
and this fucking sucks. Pabaradactyl suggested Booze Your Own Adventure, which might be the
most appropriate. I know. In a way. I kind of really like that one. Yeah, so there you go. I
mean, like, it might be a little too kitty, but at the same time, it totally works because that's
exactly, that's, that's what we do. That is exactly what we do. So, uh, but once again,
we look forward to your, uh, what you vote on.
So basically we're going to do this every other week. We're going to do one episode talking about
the Viridian saga, and another episode we'll do a review, so it'll be like one, two, one, two,
and that's, you know, how we're going to do it for the foreseeable future. Shake it off. Yep.
So the discussion about, uh, Awoken Book Two centered largely around, um, this idea of
dystopia parody versus what our original idea was, which was more a parody of Tiger's Curse,
because it inspired us so much. It just reached down the macadamals of my heart. It just reached
down your throat. Squeeze and squeeze and said cry uncle and I said uncle uncle and it said I
lied. So we wanted to do that because it was funny, but at the same time, since we are trying
to do topical parodies, sort of, I think, you know, dystopia is much more of a thing than
Tiger's Curse. Yeah. But that's not to say that, like, the idea of the white savior
is not a thing, and we cannot, yeah, we might be able to marry these two, so that's what we're
gonna, um, talk about today. We got entitled. Well, our original idea was going to be Awoken,
Arisen, and Aliven. We're going to be the third one. I'm kind of wondering if, like, maybe,
because I like the idea of another being the third one, like, another. Here's what I like about the
idea of another being the second one, because it's the new moon, and it's, that's where, like,
the triangle begins. So, another romantic interest. Glenn did point out that the title
Another is kind of different stylistically, because Awoken is so what a YA book would be
called, and Another is maybe too far, but we'll see. Although I really do like the idea of Aliven.
I mean, I'm not married to it, but I kind of want to keep it in there somewhere. I'm just saying
that. Awoken, Aliven, and Another. Sarah Jessness has always gave us a couple good ideas. Firstly,
the idea that the bad parts of the dystopian society should be things that would relate
directly to Sarah's personal life, rather than large political issues. Yeah. Well, because we
have to completely miss the point of dystopian, totalitarian things. It can't be about grand,
overarching destruction of society. No, it's about what affects me. I think that could be the build
up for the dystopian matriarchy. The matriarchy? Yeah, run by Scarlet. I really like this idea of,
like, the dystopian matriarchy run by Scarlet. No, it's like the Wonder Woman Amazons only,
like, evil. Yeah, and really hot. And Sarah, of course. But they're not really hot. We find that
out at the end of the second book, that Scarlet was ugly the whole time, just like in Cinder.
Sorry, Cinder, you're getting parodied. Sorry. We still enjoyed you. Yeah, we liked you, but
that Evil Queen, man. That Evil Queen. No, the veil hides her mustache. Baker JS.
As a contrast, I really like the idea of a new law called the Available Healthcare Act.
And Marianne Stein, who has nothing to do with Marianne Ellenson,
that, yeah, we should maybe include that political everything, because Sarah, you know,
is definitely going to have a but me attitude on how politics work. Also, this idea, like,
the way Stephanie Meyer refers to herself as a feminist, or at least as pro-woman. Right. Which
I find very interesting, and this is where it starts to take, like, it starts to dangerously
tiptoe over into really condescending territory. Yeah. Because I think she means it, and I think
she's trying to do right by women. She was just, you know, raised in this society and this culture
where the idea of, like, what women should be and should do is just so not, like, our effete New
York, you know, liberal, I need no man, you know, attitude. I think a lot of people who are raised
in very conservative Christian backgrounds, or even just conservative backgrounds in general,
struggle with that. And try to make a place for, I can be a powerful strong woman and still be a
woman from, and what I was taught a woman is. Yeah. I think there, well, especially with young
adult authors. Many of them come from that kind of background. Yeah, a lot of them come from a
really strong religious background that they feel really attached to, and so they have this difficult
time kind of reconciling this, you know, modern, I need no man, versus what it means to be a good
woman, a moral woman, you know, what you would want your kids to look up to. Aryan Librarian says
it's got to be religious freedom, right? That's got to be the thing. And also maybe love has been
outlawed, which has been done in a book called Delirium, which I'm kind of afraid to read because
that sounds like the dumbest thing ever. Well, I think we're gonna have to, though. If we end up
going, like, oh no, not love. Well, think, I mean, but that can, that's the love and the eat, pray, love.
Prayer has been outlawed. Eating has been... Organified. Oh no! Like, everyone's been sent to small
communal farms. Yeah. Which is terrible. And love is... Like, I just want my fucking McDonald's. Maybe, yeah.
I just want my fucking McDonald's. Why are you making me eat this, like, homegrown organic shit?
What the fuck's a victory garden without my lawn? And love's been outlawed. Yeah, and also love's been
outlawed because that's what happens. So we have to outsource to India. We keep saying, like, we gotta
go to India, man. We have to go to India. So our original idea, after Awoken was done, was playing
off of this idea of the Tiger's Curse parody. We were going to do, of course, New Moon, Riley Dumpster,
again. But then a plot thing happens, and Uncle Neil is like, oh no, Vic, or Ethnic Third Wheel,
he's the 10th Avatar of Vishnu. Whoopsie. And so then we go to India, and she has her big eat, pray,
love journey where, you know, somehow or other we find out that she's the special because, you know,
white women, we're all white women at. And at the end, I think we find out that he wasn't actually
the 10th Avatar. He's not actually Kalki, the 10th Avatar of Vishnu. He was, like, something that
Loki did, and we bring in, like, Loki, but it's, like, just Marvel. No, it's just Tom Hiddleston.
It's just Tom Hiddleston. Like, he keeps quoting Avengers. He's always burdened with glorious
something. And, you know, but then the world does end. But it's, it's, it's, it's not, it's reborn.
Yeah, yeah. The old world ends, the new one's reborn, and then Uncle Neil shows up with, oh no,
everything's okay. It's just we had to get rid of Thursday. Get rid of what? Oh, you see,
he didn't even miss it. No one could get the hang of Thursday. Yeah, exactly. That was our original
idea. So now it's, like, the question of, like, do we discard this all together, or do we try to
marry this in some way with this dystopia? The white savior goes to India, and it's also a
dystopia somehow. I mean, we figured out why Cthulhu goes to high school. I don't know. I don't
see why we can't marry these two ideas. I'm up for the challenge. But, yeah, I'm really digging
this idea of this Eat, Pray, Love actually referring to, like, eating spin-out-lot, praying
spin-out-lot, love spin-out-lot. Hey, I know you like those big gulp sodas, but this is American
now, buddy. We don't allow that no more. No, no! I poured it out, no! This is like prohibition all
over again. It's like, and then they had, like, the soda just, like, a shot glass.
You have the soda bootleggers. Like, the corner bars. The underground, and they're allowed to love
and drink soda. I really like it. Okay, we gotta do the soda thing. Yeah, no, we have to do the soda
thing. The totalitarian dystopia work. Because the matriarchy has to stay hot. That's why they
have on soda. Yeah, because they only drink seltzer. I think the president should be
McBlue Mixon. No, he's, like, Obam-Bloomburg. Obamberg. No, Bloombito. Bloombito.
She's never even been to New York, but you know we're gonna, come on, we need to have Bloombito.
President Bloombito. Somehow it's Vince Scarlet the whole time. That's the twist. She's the first
lady. Yeah. She brainwashes him and marries him. Women. Because women am I right? Women, am I right?
God. She's pretty much Robin, right? In House of Cards. Only she doesn't have Frank Underwood.
Yeah, only, like, President Bloombito is just, like, whatever you say, hot wife. Yeah. Because
that's how, that is how women accrue power, by being hot. So anyway, that's, that's our challenge
for this week. Marrying this, like, white savior eat, pray, love thing, where we go to India and
have to save the day, to the whole dystopia, trying to keep it within the whole topical parody
thing. Next week, a week from now, you know how bad I am at keeping a schedule, but I'm trying to
update on Mondays. We'll be doing Miss Peregrine's Home for Peculiar Children by Ransom Riggs.
In the meantime, please help us brainstorm at shayapocalypse.com in the comments. Make it easy.
Make it easy for us in the comments. Just comment there. That's where we go.
Trying to sort of collect comments from all other places. Yeah, that's hard. And of course,
be our friend on Goodreads, where we will, you know, talk things, and you can also give
us book recommendations there. I like this drink. Another! I would do the thing, but I'm pretty sure
this is, like, maybe their last two of these styles, so. Oh, right, yeah. Another!
