I think our children have more robust intelligence and questioning to be able to cope with looking
at all the different theories that are out there, looking at all the different theories
that are out there. I agree. I wish there was time for children to learn all the different
theories. They were shaped by extraordinary people who decided to observe the stars,
the rocks, life, heat, light and matter with open minds. They made conclusions based on evidence,
not their religious beliefs. Surely the knowledge they've handed down to us will
never be kept from our children. We have a revelation for the one who says,
I know everything. I've always been there. Here's what happened in the past. So when
we take that revelation, put on our set of glasses and we look at the evidence we can say,
ah, now I understand fossils couldn't have formed before sin. There was no death before sin. There
was a global flood that connects to geology. What is the age of the earth? When did the creation
actually occur? And of course, we're going to go to the Bible. How we make advances in science is
being open to all different perspectives. And that's all that we're calling for. Let's qualify
that. Fundamentalists don't advocate teaching all of the thousands of different perspectives
that are out there, like the idea that the earth is expanding or that aliens from another planet
helped build the pyramids. What they want is to be able to teach just one different perspective,
and the fundamentalist lobby is running a well-targeted campaign to convince parents,
not just in the United States, but also in other countries, of two things. That creation science
and intelligent design are science, and that there's a real debate about our origins going
on within the scientific community. And let's face it, most people don't know that much about
science or about what goes on within the scientific community. So the first thing to recognize and to
be honest about is that this has nothing to do with science. We take that revelation, put on our
set of glasses. As I explained in the last video, the scientific method made easy, starting with a
conclusion and then looking for the evidence afterwards, shatters the first golden rule of
science. It's not even the way our courts operate. If you know your conclusion in advance, why even
bother looking at the evidence? Any kind of scientific research becomes futile. This is so
obvious even to non-scientists that advocates of creation science soon realized it wasn't a great
way to break into the science curriculum. So the label was dropped in favor of something that was
much vaguer, but sounded more thoughtful. Intelligent design takes a simple two-step
approach. Find something complicated that we don't yet understand, and conclude that because
we don't understand it, the best explanation is to assume the work of an invisible being,
or to put it in a way that sounds a little more scientific, an intelligent designer. In fact,
researchers who've applied the scientific method to these supposedly intractable problems have
discovered their origins consistent with what we know and understand, even for things that seem to
be very unintelligently designed. But even if they hadn't, this leap from problem to conclusion is
not how science works. As we saw in the last video on the scientific method, real scientists
investigate things we don't understand, however complicated, until they come up with a workable
hypothesis. Based on that hypothesis, they then make a prediction that's rigorously tested. Only
when a hypothesis has been successfully tested can a conclusion be reached. Advocates of intelligent
design aren't prepared to make predictions, let alone test them, so it's not science. Maybe not
even a hypothesis, because intelligent design doesn't explain the process by which organisms
were designed and made. It would be just as useful to say it all happened by magic. So the two sides
of this supposed debate are beginning to look decidedly unequal. The theory of intelligent
design isn't a theory at all, it's an untested idea. And we never include untested ideas in the
school science curriculum, not only because they haven't been reviewed or verified or derived by
the scientific method, but because there are so many untested ideas out there, they'd fill the
entire science curriculum. As for the notion that the scientific community is divided, okay, on one
side we have biologists, including many Christian, Muslim, Jewish and Hindu biologists who accept
evolution, and on the other side we have biologists who believe in intelligent design. So the
scientific community isn't divided over this question at all, there's an overwhelming consensus.
The people who are calling for their ideas to be injected into the science curriculum are outside
the scientific community, and are happy to display a breathtaking ignorance of the subject they're
tackling. Somehow this happened? If Ben Stein is going to disagree with the theory of evolution,
at least he has to understand how it works. People like Stein may have fallen asleep in biology class,
but there's no excuse for denying our children a decent science education, insisting instead that
they dumb down to our level of ignorance. And should we really be telling children that if
they come up against a problem as scientists, they shouldn't try to investigate or resolve it? It's
okay to assume it's the work of an invisible being. How far would that have got us in the
last 500 years? In the 16th century this was a key piece of evidence for intelligent design. There
was simply no way to explain it. How could each colour know where it had to go in the rainbow,
and how did they all know how to form a perfect semicircle together? The only way these colours
could be put into such a perfect and regular pattern is if an intelligent designer was
arranging them. Intelligent design, like creation science, makes scientific research futile, and not
just in the field of biology. Intelligent design advocates like Kent Hovind define evolution as
everything from the unfolding of the universe to the deposition of sedimentary rocks. Cosmology,
geology, physics, archaeology, anything that goes against the literal interpretation of the Bible
is under threat. So the aim of the intelligent design lobby isn't to open minds or look at all
the different perspectives, or both sides of an imaginary scientific debate. The aim is to make
science look murky and indecisive, and cast doubt on theories that are the foundation of our
knowledge. The strengths of science are used against it. The willingness of scientists to
admit errors, correct them, and to modify hypotheses is used as proof that they can
get things wrong. The word theory, the highest form of proof you can get in science short of
mathematics, is mistranslated into uncertainty. Slowly the solid facts established by centuries
of scientific study are eroded. If untested hypotheses are taught alongside verified
theories, we're reducing the idea of science to just a barrow load of ideas, and asking children
to sort out for themselves which are facts based on evidence, and which are conjecture. The result
is confusion, vagueness, and disinterest. We're not opening young minds, we're emptying them.
The intrusion into science teaching threatens a number of countries, but none more so than the
United States. A hundred years ago the USA was admired as a technological powerhouse. In the
technologies of the 20th century, the United States was unsurpassed.
The reality of the 21st century is that new technologies have emerged, and other countries
are catching up. It may be hard to fathom, but children in these countries spend their time in
science class actually learning about science. Teachers don't have to use up valuable time
debating the role of an imaginary designer to placate a religious lobby, or dilute scientific
facts to conform to ancient religious texts. They're already preparing the next generation
of scientists. Are we? Who should you always trust first, God or the scientist? God. God,
and I want you to remember that.
