Proud sons of the north, there is a fell voice on the air.
Whispers of a forgotten name, Alfa.
But how does one become Alfa?
What glorious night of wisdom will teach us?
Greetings-
Surprise flex.
Was quite a long time since I performed the glorious surprise flex.
This is gonna be a fun video.
Hello boys.
I get a lot of people on YouTube calling me Beta, and I'm still not sure what that means.
But I try to be open to criticism, so I've decided that what I need is an uncucked Alfa
hero to set me straight.
And I think I've found just the man.
His name is the golden one.
Fucking massive.
That's what I am.
Fucking massive.
That's what you are.
If you're gonna teach me to be Alfa, you're gonna need to be more than fucking massive.
I mean, you'd have to be the glorious, valiant champion of modern Europe, the ever-chosen
of the gods, the golden son of mother nature.
I actually do claim to be the glorious, valiant champion of modern Europe.
I do claim to be the ever-chosen of the gods, the golden son of mother nature.
You might find that ridiculous, but then again, look at me now.
You make a fair point.
I want you to act as I act, and I want you to follow my example.
I am ready to begin the training, master.
But first, let us awaken our masculinities by bathing nude together in the purifying
waters of Lake Malaren.
How to prepare an Alfa bath.
First, fill the bath with purifying Swedish lake water.
Pour one pitcher of elven rose water.
Light the flames of Logi.
Add a pitcher of milk of the Fenris wolf.
And now, it's time.
So tell me, proud son of Sweden, what does it mean to be Alfa?
Alfa also, in my sense of the word, is more like your cool, masculine, you being that
fucking force of nature.
So I say it is fucking Alfa Uruk-hai.
I don't mean that he has a high sofa standing.
I mean, you know, look at him.
It's fucking go time.
That's what it is.
I think I'm starting to get this.
So being Alfa means being cool and masculine.
Well, I don't know what could possibly be more Alfa than this.
Hell yeah.
I just poured a liter of wolf's milk on my face.
Consider this twink uncucked.
If you're part of my fucking tribe, and if you're gay, that's fine.
Well, I'm not gay.
Why would you think that?
It's cool.
As long as you're not sissy prancing around teaching degenerate behavior to younger people.
Well, I can assure you, there will be none of that on this channel.
With that said, gay pride in gay propaganda.
I'm not a proponent for that.
Because there is no reason to promote sex in public.
You know, I'm glad someone's finally saying something.
Because for my part, I find that kind of thing disgusting.
And I'm glad someone's finally taking a stand against it.
Sex is supposed to be intimate and private.
So that makes me resent gay pride, gay parades and stuff like that.
Exactly.
See, we're on the same page.
I don't know why gay people need to always be kissing in public, making a big spectacle of themselves
when straight people, we manage to keep our sexuality in the bedroom, you know?
Oh, pass the oil, would you Lars?
My balls are getting dry.
We must stand erect as Odin's spear in defiance of the gay agenda.
Well, this is all good fun.
If you become drunk, you have committed a terrible sacrilege and you will pay for it with your life.
Oh. Okay.
Not sure what that has to do with being masculine, but...
Today I want to discuss the Jewish question, the ethnic question, the alt-right...
Wait, what? The Jewish question? Hold on.
I thought I'd make this video...
What have you done to me? You're a goddamn fascist.
And oh boy is he.
I don't mean fascist in the meaningless way people throw the term around for anyone they disagree with.
I mean he is a committed white nationalist who thinks that all non-whites should be expelled from Europe.
He has a video about the Jewish question, and he even talks about the big H.
For the golden one, masculinity, nationalism, racialism, anti-feminism, and occult neo-Nazi paganism
are all united in one belief system he calls taking the glorious pill.
Now for the sake of moving on with this video, I'm not going to argue that it's wrong to be a Nazi.
I'm just going to assume it.
And it should always be okay to assume that being a Nazi is wrong.
I thought this was one of the three biggest lessons from the last thousand years of Western history.
You know, don't invade Russia, don't allow a ship to dock if everyone on board has died of the plague,
and don't allow nationalism to gain traction in Europe.
But here we are.
Anyway, this video is supposed to be about alpha males, so let's try to move on.
Wait a minute, the golden one has a new video.
It's called Fash Skyrim, which I guess is like Fascist Skyrim, and I warned you about this.
Apprentices of the Frankfurt School and Hillary supporters.
We've got to watch this.
Here's another one of those feminists who don't believe in the patriarchy.
I'm going to take her mood and celebrate the victory of Donald Trump.
Gentle women of the jury.
Alpha male exhibit number one is a larping Swedish fascist who plays Skyrim
so that he can pretend he's killing feminists in the Frankfurt School.
No further questions.
So I know I might be accused of strawmanning if my only example of an alpha male
is an adorably ridiculous bodybuilding Nazi whose ideas about women are dictated directly to him by his teddy bear.
Teddy, how can one obtain a fair maiden?
Uh huh, okay.
Can one also obtain understanding of the nature of women?
Okay, so Teddy says that in order to truly understand the nature of women
we must first retake Constantinople from the Ottoman Empire.
But I've searched YouTube for self-proclaimed alpha males who aren't raving lunatics
and, well, take a look at what I've come up with.
There's Davis Arrini.
And when you look at these social justice warrior freaks,
okay, with their blue hair and their obesity and their low testosterone
and their sexual perversity and their STDs and their useless degrees
and their criminal histories.
No.
There's Roosh.
Every man in this room is on the hook for rape for sex that is not rape.
No.
Uh, there's this kangaroo and this guy.
Red pill philosophy.
Because at the end of the day, sex, you're going to be impaling her with your ugly, engorged penis.
There's nothing pretty about that. No pretty boy, okay?
Um, Chris, I don't want to embarrass you.
And I know that you're the dating expert. I'm not questioning your authority.
But you might want to take the bicycle helmet off
before telling any women that you want to impale them on your hideous, engorged member.
Just a word of advice.
Now one trend I'm noticing with these alpha guys is they're all mildly to extremely racist.
Let's be frank. White people are the least racist people on the planet.
Fucking niggers.
There should actually be more blacks being shot by police statistically when you compare it to other races.
No white American wants to see American cities turn black.
But why are they all racist? What is the connection between alpha and racism?
Well, here's one idea.
Calling yourself alpha basically means that you fetishize male dominance,
which likely means that you're extremely anti-feminist.
And extreme anti-feminism is often coupled with racism because these beliefs are not as separate as they seem.
In fact, they form two parts of the white nationalist worldview, where the third part is anti-Semitism.
The anti-Semitism is important because it helps explain why the supposedly naturally dominant white males are losing power to women and minorities.
See, at the core of the white nationalist worldview is concern for the purity of white women.
This leads to anti-feminism, on the one hand, because feminism is seen as a threat to traditional gender roles
that make white women subservient and loyal to white men.
Non-white races are viewed as a threat to the purity of white women
because they're often viewed as barbaric, dangerous, unclean, and brutish.
This is why xenophobes place so much emphasis on the sexual danger non-white immigrants pose to white women,
and it's why you'll see endless discussion of news events that validate this fear in white nationalist circles.
But notice that this worldview is in need of an explanation for why the supposedly inferior races pose such a serious threat to the supposedly superior whites.
Well, this is where the Jews come in.
Anti-Semitism is different from other forms of racism in that instead of being resented for being supposedly brutish and stupid,
the Jews are resented for being smart, but in an evil, duplicitous, cunning sort of way.
So the idea is that a Jewish elite is poisoning white society with ideas like multiculturalism, feminism, and cultural Marxism,
thereby leaving it vulnerable to the so-called third world invasion.
And it seems to me that this worldview is becoming increasingly common, which is worrying, since, funny though it may be on the fringe,
with the wrong mix of power and desperation, the conclusion of these people's worldview is genocide.
Ugh, this video has gotten dark. Remember how fun this video was when we started?
I guess it's a dark world, so...
Another thing I've noticed about these guys is that none of them is especially high on the social hierarchy.
The term alpha is used by ethologists to describe animals at the top of the hierarchy.
But that must not be the way these people use the word, because, well, they're kind of a bunch of fringe weirdos.
The people who are actually alpha are people like Warren Buffett and Obama, people who these guys tend not to like.
Speaking of which, don't you dare fucking claim to be alpha in the comments or response to this video.
YouTubing is an inherently epsilon activity, and leaving comments is positively omega.
So let's maybe look beyond YouTube from here on.
What I find when I Google alpha male is a mix of pickup artists, dating coaches, and self-help gurus,
all claiming to turn their beta followers into alphas so they can finally get mad pussy.
There's also a bunch of articles by people who can actually write, debunking the whole concept,
usually mentioning the fact that it encourages men to think like Elliot Rodger.
It turns out that the 1947 study that introduced the idea that wolf societies are organized around alpha males
has been discredited and disavowed by the author because it was based on the behavior of captive wolves.
In nature, not even wolves can be divided into alphas and betas,
and there's certainly no scientific evidence to suggest that humans can.
So what alpha looks like to me is a pseudoscientific term used by guys who don't have a lot going for them
to inflate their wounded masculinity.
I'm noticing that there aren't a whole lot of Fortune 500 CEOs going around bragging about how alpha they are.
The so-called alphas are a bunch of fringe hucksters selling bad advice and bad products to insecure and desperate men.
I say selling because it's only a matter of time before these guys try to sell you some kind of dietary supplement
or 12-step seduction system that's supposed to increase your testosterone and make women attracted to you
because god, you're lonely and desperate and you don't know how to express it because you were raised in an atmosphere
of toxic masculinity that emotionally stifles men and taught you that aggression is the only acceptable outlet for your inner pain.
And these guys all talk about women like they're mysterious mermaids from another planet,
which is not really the way guys who have good relations with women tend to talk about them.
In my experience, women are attracted to confident guys, but not to guys who insecurely brag about how confident they are
and definitely not to guys who post lunatic racist ramblings on the internet.
The sad thing is it doesn't have to be this way. Some of these guys could do better.
I actually kind of like the golden one. I like his muscles, I like his costumes, I like Skyrim and big weapons and cool manly stuff.
And he's actually pretty funny and can probably be pretty popular with women if he just quit the Nazi shit that's kind of ruining his life.
He loses sponsor after sponsor because of it and you can tell he makes other sacrifices for his political views.
It's almost admirable, or at least it would be if his political views weren't completely abhorrent and wrong.
So for the rest of you, I'd advise finding a better role model. Don't go around calling people betas.
Get as convinced by your posturing and it makes you look like an asshole.
The west has fallen, but from these ashes it shall rise again. What golden lion shall save us?
I am ready to die for Mother Europa!
Many thanks to the patrons who made this video possible. I've just updated my Patreon reward levels too, so make sure to check my page for more information about that.
If you liked this video, tell Loras to bring me another pitcher of milk.
