A few people messaged me on the channel page asking about yet another video doing the rounds
of social media, Top 5 Climate Myths by Steven Crowder.
I don't know why this has become so popular, but the fact that several people cited the
same thing made me think it would be worth doing a short video on it.
So here goes.
Unless you accept all of those points wholesale, you are labelled a science denier by the same
people who often push the idea that gender is merely a figment of your imagination.
Well I don't accept all these points wholesale, Steve, and I'm certainly not a science denier
or someone who thinks gender is a figment of one's imagination.
As I've said before on my channel, the word denier is itself derogatory and unscientific.
But if we take the politics, subjectivity and emotion out of these statements, then
yes I do accept them.
The Earth is warming.
I accept that the Earth is warming.
Number two, that humans are the primary cause of it.
I'm not going to accept that humans are the primary cause, because that leads to all kinds
of emotional arguments about religion and guilt and it's all our fault or it's not our fault.
Critics of climate science point out that the Earth's climate has been changing for
millions of years before humans came along, and they've got a good point.
So if we just strip this down to the science, the evidence shows that the cause of warming
is increased levels of carbon dioxide.
Number three, that it will have catastrophic results.
Because you don't define what catastrophic means, Steve.
One man's catastrophe is another man's minor inconvenience.
So again, let's go with what's been published in the scientific literature, which strips
out emotional adjectives and just deals with the quantifiable consequences of global warming,
mainly higher sea levels, stronger hurricanes, increased salination, drought and flood, coastal
erosion and acidification of the oceans.
And most importantly, number four, that the only entity competent and fit to stop these
results is the United States government or some international form of government.
Well, obviously, you can't be a science denier if you don't think the solution lies in more
government control, because that's a matter of opinion and politics, not science.
So before you start arguing about the best solution for an issue that you say doesn't
exist, perhaps the first step should be to accept the science.
Maybe you believe all of these points, and that's fine.
I want to hear from you in the comments section.
Well, at the request of a few of my subscribers, you're hearing from me in this video.
Hi.
Now, if you still don't accept the science with all the politics and subjectivity stripped
out, then you're still not a science denier, Steve, but you are someone who prefers to
believe what he reads in blogs rather than accept what's published in the scientific
literature.
So here goes.
The consensus.
97% of scientists agree on climate change.
As I've said many times, science isn't decided by consensus.
After all, not all scientists agree that the Earth is billions of years old or that animals
evolved or that HIV causes AIDS.
But sorry, Steve, what do you say?
Science isn't determined by consensus.
It's determined by truth.
There might have been consensus that the Earth was flat among certain circles.
Truth revealed that it wasn't.
Yes, he's absolutely right.
It's not determined by consensus.
Although, come on, it's not determined by revealed truth either.
Science isn't religion, so it's determined by evidence, what's known as observation
and inference.
Scientific theories get accepted and made part of the teaching curriculum, not because
most scientists vote for them, but because they're supported by what's called the
overwhelming preponderance of evidence, which is published in respected scientific journals.
I explained this last year in my video Scientific Consensus and Arguments from Authority.
So if you're curious to know why some hypotheses get accepted and others fall by the wayside,
then take a look.
And if you don't like the system, don't blame me, I'm just telling you how it works.
And it does work because it's shown us the link between natural selection and evolution,
between HIV and AIDS, plate tectonics and earthquakes, and yes, carbon dioxide and global
temperature.
You can't praise the method for giving us the theories you like and then say the method
doesn't work when it gives us a theory you don't like.
But on the question of whether these theories are decided by consensus, they're not.
And no poll of scientists, whoever that might be, has ever been taken.
So I agree, Steve, this myth is busted.
Myth number two.
The ice sheets are melting.
Truth.
The Antarctic ice sheets are actually growing by billions of tonnes per year.
Yes, that's according to a study by NASA.
It says Antarctic ice is growing by 82 billion tonnes a year.
And of course, researchers have a very good idea as to why that's happening.
But of course, there are two major ice sheets on Earth.
One is Antarctica, the other is Greenland.
So now, let's hear the figure for Greenland.
According to the new analysis of satellite data, the Antarctic ice sheet showed a net
gain of 112 billion tonnes of ice per year from 1992 to 2001.
Actually, the most recent figure is 82 billion tonnes a year, which you'll mention in a minute.
But now give us the figure for the Earth's other ice sheet on Greenland, so we can work
out the net figure and see whether the myth is true or not.
So where does the myth come from that the ice sheets are melting?
The net gain, net gain being the key words, slowed down to only 82 billion tonnes of Greenland.
Greenland, Steve.
You still haven't given us the figure for Greenland.
I know what you're thinking.
OK, numbers are relative.
No.
I'm thinking, why do you only give us the figure for one ice sheet that happens to fit
your narrative that ice sheets aren't melting, but you won't give us the figure for the other
ice sheet?
So I'll do it myself.
While Antarctica may be gaining ice to the tune of 82 billion tonnes a year, Greenland
is losing ice to the tune of 269 billion tonnes a year.
In other words, on a global scale, the ice sheets are indeed melting away at the rate
of around 187 billion tonnes a year.
That's a net melt of 187 cubic kilometres of ice every year.
And if we add in glaciers and sea ice, the net melt is even larger.
So where does the myth come from that the ice sheets are melting?
Well, Steve, it comes from an appraisal of measurements taken of both ice sheets, not
just the one you happen to read because it's been copied and pasted on the blogosphere.
It comes from people who read the scientific literature, not blogs.
And it comes from NASA, the people whose results you believe for Antarctica, but quietly ignore
in Greenland.
It comes from people who want to see the whole picture, not just a part of the picture that
suits their preconceived beliefs.
That's where the myth comes from.
And that's why this myth is very definitely confirmed.
Myth!
The polar bears are dying off!
OK.
So what?
Truth!
There are possibly more of these soulless killing monsters on Earth today than ever.
Certainly since we've begun monitoring them.
What's that got to do with the issue of whether the Earth is warming, whether carbon dioxide
is the cause, and whether it'll cause stronger hurricanes, increased salination, droughts
and floods and sea level rise, and acidification of the oceans and fewer coral reefs and more
coastal erosion?
These are the myths you're supposed to be busting.
But OK, let's take a look anyway.
Crowder tells us to go to his website for his source, which I did.
It's a blog called factcheck.org.
It says there has indeed been a rise in polar bear numbers since the 1970s, due mainly to
legislation banning polar bear hunting.
And it also says many scientists believe that due to climate change and resulting environmental
factors, the trend is reversing.
Now remember, this is Crowder's source.
And funnily enough, he never mentioned any of this.
Crowder's other source from which he got this graph is, of course, another blog.
The blogger thinks numbers may be increasing.
And she could be right.
My policy is not to believe everything I read in blogs.
But both of Crowder's sources agree on one thing.
We simply don't know for sure.
That's not my assessment.
I haven't got a clue either.
That's the assessment of the blog's Crowder sites.
So despite his revealed truth that polar bear numbers are increasing, we can chalk that
myth down to don't know.
And as far as the question of whether carbon dioxide is the cause of global warming is
concerned, the number of polar bears is totally irrelevant.
Myth number four.
Our current climate models are accurate.
Crowder doesn't actually address the myth he set up, but he does talk about a variety
of other things.
We rely on a few organizations for these predictions, one of which is NOAA.
They can't even accurately predict how many hurricanes there will be this year in Florida.
That's right, they can't.
What a shame that wasn't the myth.
Over 300 scientists are imploring lawmakers to investigate NOAA.
Well, not quite.
The list includes Christopher Monckton, who's a politician, and John Coleman, who graduated
in media studies, and of course Tim Ball, who claims once again to have been a professor
of climatology when, in fact, he was a professor of geography.
But anyway, these people claim NOAA wrongly adjusted temperature data in this 2015 paper.
So why didn't these 300 signatories simply write a response paper pointing out what they
saw as flaws in the NOAA methodology?
Who knows?
Whatever the reason, this still isn't the myth Crowder tasked himself with busting.
So many predictions being wrong, including, by the way, nearly all of the predictions
made in Al Gore's Oscar-nominated An Inconvenient Truth.
Mistakes in Al Gore's movie is evidence that climate research has got things wrong?
Seriously, Steve?
Which predictions to rattle off a few like Mount Kilimanjaro as we address the polar
bears?
North Pole still has ice.
But you can't then make the leap that because people get things wrong in the public media
that the science must therefore be wrong.
Researchers can't be held responsible for the mistakes made by Al Gore and environmentalists
any more than they can be held responsible for the mistakes made by the bloggers you
use as sources.
But you can go back to the 70s and find other doomsday predictions, like global cooling.
But again, what's that got to do with climate researchers?
Never mind the predictions made by movies, books, magazines and individuals with the
scientific acumen of Cheez Whiz, let's deal with the predictions of real, actual climate
researchers, as published in the scientific literature.
Isn't that what you're trying to prove is wrong?
The vast majority of published papers in the 1960s and 70s were predicting warming, not
cooling, by a margin of 44 to 7.
And the reason they gave for this predicted warming was increasing levels of CO2.
Due to our release through factories and automobiles every year of more than 6 billion tonnes of
carbon dioxide, which helps air absorb heat from the sun, our atmosphere seems to be getting
warmer.
This is bad.
Well, it's been calculated a few degrees rise in the Earth's temperature would melt the
polar ice cap.
That isn't a recent propaganda message from Greenpeace, it was an educational film shown
in schools and colleges in 1958.
And of course those predictions have proved 100% accurate.
Ice sheets, glaciers and sea ice are melting, and the rate of melt is accelerating.
Temperatures have been rising to record levels, even when increased pollution and lower solar
output should have been sending temperatures lower.
And while we all tend to focus on atmospheric temperatures, remember that climate scientists
look at the Earth as a whole.
90% of the extra heat is going into the oceans, which have also fulfilled the predictions
of warming.
The only thing climate models can't do is predict short term changes, because in the
short term there are lots of minor fluctuations that affect measurements like temperature
and sea level.
It's like me trying to predict on January 1st in Denver whether the temperature on February
1st will be warmer or colder.
It's almost impossible.
But looking further into the future it gets easier, and I can confidently predict that
the temperature in Denver will be higher in May and much higher in July.
That's because over short periods of time the increasing warming of the sun may not
overcome short term fluctuations.
But over a longer period of time these background fluctuations become less significant.
And while temperatures may go up and down on a daily or even weekly basis, I can confidently
predict that every month in Denver between January and July is going to be warmer on
average than the previous one.
So what climate models can do, and have done very successfully, is predict the long term
trend.
When geologists applied the model to the past 500 million years, it fit almost perfectly
with the continuous changes in the Earth's climate.
Geologists discovered that changing levels of carbon dioxide explained nearly all the
long term changes in temperature.
The model explained the so-called faint sun paradox – that's the problem of why the
Earth was much hotter than today at a time when the sun was much, much weaker.
It was because CO2 levels were many times higher than today.
The model explained why the Earth escaped from a deep freeze during the Precambrian.
It was because of a slow accumulation of carbon dioxide from volcanoes.
The model explained why the Earth has maintained a Goldilocks climate ever since, because as
the sun has been getting increasingly hotter, the high levels of carbon dioxide have gradually
been taken out of the atmosphere and buried as limestone, coal and oil.
And the model solved the problem of why the Earth warmed so much after each glaciation
given that the increased insulation that sparked them wasn't strong enough to melt the ice
sheets.
In fact, the climate model works so well that carbon dioxide is being called the Earth's
thermostat and the long term regulator of the Earth's climate.
We even understand the mechanism by which carbon dioxide can do this.
It's in peer-reviewed research papers going back over a hundred years, when it was first
discovered that carbon dioxide absorbs long-wave radiation, and a physicist calculated as far
back as the 19th century that if the carbon dioxide level ever got high enough, it could
affect the Earth's climate.
Talk about a prescient prediction!
So notwithstanding the fact that Al Gore and assorted environmentalists often make wacky
predictions that are wrong, as far as researchers in the field of glaciology, atmospheric physics,
oceanography, geology, paleoclimatology, and all the other assorted disciplines that
have built up this model are concerned, this myth is confirmed.
National or international government is the only entity capable of solving imminent climate
change catastrophe.
Well, as I said at the beginning, that's not only a political question, it's tackling a
problem that you say doesn't exist.
So here's my suggestion for your next video, Steve.
What's the issues you put up at the beginning?
Is the Earth warming?
Is carbon dioxide from fossil fuel burning the cause?
Will the result be higher sea levels, stronger hurricanes, increased salination, drought
and flood, acidification of the oceans, and coastal erosion?
These are the things that matter to us, because they'll affect our food supply, our infrastructure,
and most importantly, our wallets.
That matters more to people than the number of bloody polar bears.
Put these questions up as myths and see if you can bust them.
But don't just cite a blog and tell people Fred Blogger doesn't believe it, so that proves
it's not true.
You're an intelligent man, dig a little deeper.
Check the blogger's source and verify it.
Find out what the science says by checking the scientific literature, and see if there's
a discrepancy or an explanation of why the blogger might have got his facts wrong.
Look at all the evidence, not just the bits that give you the answer you want.
With the deepest respect, talking louder doesn't mean you're better informed.
