This is Cthulhu. It's a film that came out in 2008. Not many people appear to have seen
it.
As a teenager, I was obsessed with the works of Howard Phillips Lovecraft. Lovecraft was
a pioneer in Pulp Horror Fiction, immediately gripping with his cavalcade of creative monsters,
epic scope, terrible fates, and a unique philosophy about the terror of the existence of gods
greater than the human consciousness could allow. The man's work was inspirational
and moving to me. It made me think, made me dream, made me want to be a writer. Also,
seeing cool new words like Theosophists, or Non-Euclidean, or sentences like The Blood
Roots grew insolent in their chromatic perversion made me feel smart. I liked thinking I was
smart.
I was a big fan of the role-playing game, too. I just really liked the way that it dealt
with the mythos and how you interact with it, and the way it modeled sanity was really
good, too. And, hang on, can we, can someone find out who did this and why? I've been confused
by this for like a decade now.
As my interest grew and I ran out of stories by, inspired by, or about Lovecraft to read,
I started playing or watching any game or film even remotely based on his work. I'd
seen Re-Animator and its sequels, and From Beyond, and I was even about to watch Hellraiser
when I found an interview with Clive Barker where he said he didn't like Lovecraft's
writing very much and decided not to watch the film out of some misguided sense of spite.
That was how I did things back then, apparently.
I'd heard that Guillermo del Toro was going to adapt At the Mountains of Madness, one
of the best of Lovecraft's stories, and I couldn't wait for that. It turned out
I shouldn't have waited because it didn't happen. It was in development hell for a very
long time, and then it was never greenlit.
Then, as I was scraping the bottom of the barrel and watching fan films on YouTube,
I eventually found out about Cthulhu. It was named after Lovecraft's most famous creation,
and it had been made so recently that it might have been able to take advantage of the kinds
of effects and production techniques possible in modern filmmaking that something of truly
epic scale might actually have been possible. Cthulhu is not that film. Cthulhu isn't in
the film. It isn't even based on the short story The Call of Cthulhu. It's actually
a loose, very loose, interpretation of The Shadow Over Innsmouth. In that story, the
narrator investigates a New England fishing town where the people are strange and unwelcoming
to outsiders. He eventually discovers that the people of the town worship a godlike fish
creature named Dagon and its monstrous children, and have begun breeding with those creatures,
and their descendants eventually transform into monsters themselves to take to the water
and live forever beneath the sea with Dagon. After barely escaping with his life, the narrator
realizes that his family tree comes from Innsmouth, and he is slowly becoming one of them, too,
and he's starting to like it and relish the chance to worship Dagon for all time. It's
a really good story, and it's an excellent example of early 20th century American horror,
with the narrator's final change serving as a genuinely uncomfortable and fascinating
twist. It's really a true classic. This film is about a gay college professor called Russell,
who learns that his mother has passed away and returns to his hometown for her funeral.
Russell's father is the leader of a strange religious cult, and also deeply homophobic,
along with many of the rest of the townspeople. Russell realizes the cult has designs on him
of some kind, and something strange is going on. He reconnects with an old lover from his
past and tries to learn the truth as the people become increasingly hostile towards his search.
In lieu of looking at the tangible specifics of the horror, the beliefs of the cult, or
portraying the monsters from the original story, the film focuses on Russell's own
emotional state, his experiences and dreams, and relation to the people he encounters as
he tries to understand what is happening. When monsters do briefly appear, there's
not really much to see. The story isn't really concerned with them.
When I first saw this film, I decided that I hated it more than any other film. It had
taken something I cared about and enjoyed, and removed the things I thought made it interesting
and valuable. It made an existential horror about god-like creatures that care not for
human affairs into a story where the god in question never turns up or does anything
or is even really talked about in it. And even the name's technically the wrong name
of the god. Oh, and if you put the disc in a PC, the label doesn't even spell Cthulhu
properly! It's such an easy word to spell! The whole film felt like a betrayal. The camera
sometimes sits very still, trapping you with Russell in situations neither of you want
to be in, for conversations he doesn't want to be having with people he doesn't want to
see.
So, um, how's the, uh, how's the church?
How's the gay life treating you, Russell?
It's my life.
Is it satisfying?
Are you fulfilled?
What do you want to know? You want to know what we do?
Danny, please, just stay, stay out of this.
I didn't want any of this. I wanted something big, something epic, something focusing on
the horror of the big monsters, the sheer scope of the cosmos beyond our reach and the
nihilistic implications of being unimportant in the face of seemingly all-powerful things
that can decide our fate on a whim. For so much of it, it was such an uncomfortable and
personal and low-key horror. A human horror I wasn't really prepared for and was sure
I didn't want.
But as I got older and lived a decade of new experiences, to put it simply, I grew up.
I just sort of realized one day that I was capable of being romantically attracted to
men as well as women. I realized I was different from how I'd even thought of myself. I'd
just sort of naturally seen myself as straight, and even if I didn't think I thought of it
this way, on some primal level, I'd thought of being straight as being normal. I didn't
know why I thought like that. It's probably a mix of not really thinking too hard about
these things at the time combined with the vague notions and expectations our society
tends to have towards people's sexuality. But one day I looked in the mirror and saw
myself as not who I thought I was. I saw myself as an outsider from me, from the identity
I'd assumed for myself. And then I had a few difficult conversations with troublesome
people about those feelings. I'd always experienced termophobia. I was an effeminate
boy growing up, but I hadn't really cared because at the time I'd not really accepted
it as an insult or seen anything wrong with being called gay by losers in high school
who had just as much growing up to do as I did. But when I actually was one of those
people and knew it, all of a sudden it was a real judgment of who I actually was. To
them I'd actually become lesser. Being told I was going to die of AIDS and that my feelings
were unnatural and so on, and having to deal with being actually expected to try to convince
people that I wasn't inferior to them, suddenly made me think about that Cthulhu film I'd
seen a few years before. It was like it knew what I was going through. It knew how it felt
to sit in a room you just can't leave and have a piece of your personhood interrogated.
It knew how it felt to be seen as an outsider, and it knew how it felt to connect with someone
who understands and accepts you. Somehow it knew me and how I'd felt before I'd ever
had a chance to. Some of the scenes from this film just kept coming back up in my mind.
It hadn't been what I'd thought I'd wanted, but what it was struck a chord with me anyway
on a level I didn't know was there. It just took a while for me to hear the chiming.
It turns out that some of the greatest horrors, biggest sources of sadness in our lives, don't
come from scope or big questions, but from the tiniest things. If you've ever lost
a loved one and had to be involved with the arrangements of their funeral, or if you've
ever had to be around someone you'd made an effort to cut out of your life because
of something abusive they'd done to you, or even something as simple as being reminded,
gently, that you're in a place where everyone regards you with suspicion, that you're
an outsider to them, you'll already know that the idea of a powerful cosmic monster
out there somewhere beneath the sea can actually be the least of a person's problems.
The film was, in retrospect, a meaningful and valuable work that paid respect to the
source material's themes and emotions in ways I hadn't grasped as a cynical kid who
thought he knew he was straight and thought he knew what made Lovecraft good, and I just
wasn't ready to appreciate the value of that kind of story at the time.
Here's a review from back in 2009 on the film's Amazon page by someone called Giles.
Giles writes...
I can't stress how bad this film is on every level. As for H.P. Lovecraft, he must be spinning
in his grave, because this is definitely the worst film adaptation yet. It is vaguely based
on Shadow over Innsmouth, but the story, what there is of it, is so badly constructed that
you could easily miss the very few similarities.
And why all the gay subplot? What was that all about?
Now, here's the thing about Giles from 2009.
I was Giles in 2009.
No, I'm fairly certain I didn't write this exact Amazon review, but I felt the same way
as this person at around the same time. It didn't make sense to the teenage me whose
main frame of reference on the world was the horror stories he'd read, but then I grew
up and it started making a lot more sense without me even having to go back and see
the film again.
This film and its delayed effect on me got me thinking about what works about Lovecraft's
stories, what doesn't, and what the best way might be to navigate these qualities in
creating an adaptation.
And along the way, with a lot of encouragement, and if it's not too awkward, we'll maybe
talk about the fact that a writer who basically founded a subgenre of fiction has been hugely
influential and made so many people want to become writers, including myself, was really
massively racist.
INTRO
Anyway, let's start at the beginning, shall we?
Why do humans create and tell each other stories?
Yeah, I'm sure we can settle that real quick, we've only been asking that question for
a millennia.
I can solve that, I've got a plaque for surpassing over 100,000 YouTube subscribers.
Firstly, we should acknowledge that fiction isn't simply the opposite of truth, it is,
in some sense, a reflection of truth.
Let's look at horror stories.
When a ghost story speaks of a place being haunted by the past, it speaks to us about
the ways that really does happen, the ways the world controls and decides things for
us, and how the legacy, the result of other people's decisions, are still here with
us even after the people who made them are gone.
The ghosts of the past really do haunt the present they built.
Vampires, similarly, tend to be impactful because they reflect some true aspect of the
society that was writing about them at the time.
There's a reason Dracula was a count.
Vampires are aristocratic, upper-class beings that live by parasitically consuming the essence
of the poor workers and exploiting people using their influence, either their literal
riches or their other, less tangible powers.
And in doing this, they literalize a very real but much more vague social antagonism.
The aristocracies, monarchies, and other rich and powerful figures over history rarely actually
drink people's blood for sustenance, although the way the current economy is going, who
knows, but the rich really are vampires, in a sense.
They really do profit and thrive from the work and sacrifice of those beneath them.
It's not unimaginable that consciousness of this kind of antagonism makes its way
into folklore as creatures that are only slightly more exaggerated forms of the actual power
relationships between rich and poor people, or boss and worker.
Bram Stoker?
More like Gram-shee Stoker?
Uh, doesn't really work, does it?
Is there a better Marxist thinker who would work here as a pun?
Let me know in the comments so I can feel like an idiot for missing it.
When you're reading Dracula, you're not just reading a creative horror about a scary
monster, you're reading a story that most people, on some level, understand.
It's relevant to the world people live in, where a non-magical version of Dracula's
immense influence and theft of livelihood from ordinary people really does happen.
Notably, even Karl Marx repeatedly used vampirism as a way of describing the nature of capitalism
in Das Kapital.
Look, my point here isn't that vampire stories are all secretly about how capitalism is bad
or something, that would be ridiculous, and so many of them were written before the actual
proper invention of capitalism as we know it today.
My point is that it was a way of talking about issues that functioned so well that
when the time came to actually talk about things like capitalism, the guy who started
talking about it used vampires as a way of talking about it, which usually means that
the stories were onto something that was kind of, like, real, something that was there.
It's also notable that Fifty Shades of Grey, originally a fanfiction based on Twilight,
kinda does this too.
It takes out all the major supernatural aspects of Twilight and, of course, the simplest way
of bringing the dynamics between a magical, immortal vampire and a young, innocent teenage
girl into the real world is to reimagine the vampire as a billionaire with immense influence
and a very particular sexual taste.
Look, the richer vampires, basically, I think have made this point.
The Slasher film also embodies this as well.
The killer in Slasher stories is an urban, modern creature which expresses modern, urban
The fear of what's happening in the neighborhood behind everyone's closed doors where they
could be getting up to just about anything.
The fear of the effects of modern living on people growing up in it.
Fellow YouTuber Nick's Fears did a really cool video going into the deeper aspects of
this in Halloween, which you can check out linked in the description.
It's good and long and fun and please go watch it.
The Slasher films are silly, gross, gory, and often just kind of bad, but they got popular
because they're dealing with something that's real and actually happening.
Okay, that's not actually happening in real life, but that's from like part eight of a
franchise and you don't get seven sequels without at least originally having some resonating
cultural.
He punches his head into a bin.
You get a perspective shot of it.
It's like you're looking out of his head as it flies off.
The idea that fiction is not the opposite of facts, but actually can be more truthful
than facts on their own is key to what makes storytelling so important.
Art is all lies, all perceptions, always subjective, always up for further interpretation,
and always slanted by the perspectives of its creators.
But art is lies in service to truth.
Bringing all of this back, what of Lovecraft?
What makes his work in particular continue to be remembered alongside Dracula or Halloween
and act as direct inspiration for yet more creative works?
What truth is hidden within his fiction?
Well, it might be the existential horror.
His works come together to relate a thoroughly nihilistic universe,
wholly uncaring about our existence, and there may well be a truth to that,
but it isn't whether or not human existence actually matters that's central to his work.
It's not quite the idea of that stuff actually being true,
but rather the direct feeling of being unimportant in the grand scheme of things.
Lovecraft's writing and tropes function in this regard a lot like one of the writers
who in turn inspired him, Edgar Allan Poe.
Poe doesn't exactly make people feel good.
Rather, he makes them feel sad in a productive way.
It can make people who are prone to those feelings feel less alone
because they know others have them too.
The Call of Cthulhu doesn't begin by telling you how scary a big monster could be
or giving you a description of what its tentacles would look like.
It opens with a profound fear of the future and of what discoveries might lie there.
The sciences, each straining in its own direction, have hitherto harmed us little,
but someday the piecing together of dissociated knowledge
will open up such terrifying vistas of reality and of our frightful position therein
that we shall either go mad from the revelation
or flee from the deadly light into the peace and safety of a new dark age.
So what mattered wasn't how creative or imaginative his stories got,
but how they related to people's own feelings of unimportance
then and now in the actual world.
There's the old joke that a paranoid person,
if they were ever to discover the room that the government spied on them from
with all the notes on their lives,
they wouldn't actually be any more afraid because of this.
They'd feel validated.
They weren't paranoid.
They were right.
And through that lens, Lovecraft is a way of feeling completely assured
that the world really is out to get you,
and maybe God doesn't care or hates you or wants you dead.
You can use special effects to design something scarier
than the man himself could ever have imagined,
but that alone isn't actually the thing that's scary about the story.
What's scary is the way these smaller aspects build
to create a sense that humans are tiny and powerless creatures,
that the greatest height we can aspire to
is a deep and intimate understanding of just how little we understand.
Lovecraft rarely reused his creations between stories,
and that's because the creatures he came up with didn't really matter.
They were interchangeable,
and the ideas they existed to communicate
with their scope and alienness was what mattered.
Unfortunately, however, this is where things get a bit hairy and complicated.
One of Lovecraft's most famous quotes goes,
"'The oldest and strongest emotion of mankind is fear,
and the oldest and strongest kind of fear is fear of the unknown.'"
And you know what this guy didn't know much about?
People of other races.
Look, we've managed to brush past it,
but we do have to talk about Lovecraft's racism, sexism,
antisemitism, and homophobia.
It's happening now.
So for the folks out there who don't think you can criticize an author's beliefs
just because it was a different time and it happened 100 years ago,
thanks for watching.
Don't forget to like and subscribe.
I'll see you next time.
I promise I'll review a game and make some jokes or something in the next one.
Are they gone?
Okay, they're gone.
Right, so it's pop-culturally quite well known that Lovecraft was a bit xenophobic,
and I do remember reading some pretty bad stuff,
but it was a while ago that I read it,
and I'm sure it can't be as bad as I remember.
What the fuck is nautical looking supposed to mean, Howard?
What does it even mean?
...
In his biography of H.P. Lovecraft, fittingly entitled
Against the World Against Life,
Michel Houellebecq writes,
The character of Lovecraft fascinates us,
partly because his system of values is entirely opposed to ours.
Fundamentally racist, openly reactionary,
he glorifies Puritan inhibition and quite evidently finds repellent
any open display of eroticism.
Resolutely anti-commercial, he despises money,
considers democracy to be pure folly, progress an illusion.
The word liberty, so dear to Americans, elicits from him only a gloomy sneer.
All his life he maintained a typically aristocratic attitude of scorn
for humanity in general together with an extreme solicitude
toward individuals in person.
Houellebecq kinda sucks, honestly,
and idolizes some of Lovecraft's worst qualities in his biography,
but this quote is helpful in illustrating the specifics
of Lovecraft's worldview, so I'm gonna use it.
A stopped clock is right twice a day, I suppose.
Lovecraft seemingly hated society itself,
but he had a deeper and specific dislike
for Black and Jewish people along with immigrants.
It's so prevalent in his writing that even citing multiple examples
would kind of diminish how overwhelming and constant it is.
I can't even bring myself to say the name of Lovecraft's cat
because it's a racial slur.
And despite this obviously completely full schedule of racism
and general hatred for humanity itself,
he also managed to find time to be a raging homophobe.
He claimed not to have even known homosexuality existed
until he was in his 30s,
but then he goes on to immediately compare it to being a pederast.
You know, growing up, I always would immediately try to find ways
to write off or handwave away the racism.
You know, I would say, well, it was a part of his time.
I never really just sat down and gave myself the opportunity
to just say, God, what a piece of shit.
I mean, honestly, like, his work meant something to me
in a really, like, profound way
that no other work has ever really done,
but I fucking think the guy's terrible.
As a side note, Lovecraft's views apparently softened a little bit over time.
In a letter he wrote a month before his death,
he claimed he understood the blindness
and defiant ignorance of reactionaries
because he used to be one.
"'I know how smugly ignorant I was,' he wrote.
He supposedly became a socialist in the last year of his life
and supported the New Deal,
and he was married to a Jewish woman for a while,
but it's debatable whether he really developed all that much,
and the racism in his work is still unavoidably there.'"
And this leads us to a very weird and difficult question.
Why are there queer Lovecraft fans?
Why do I exist?
And why do so many people like me exist?
Why is this space a place for a lot of queer
and marginalized people in the first place?
Why does his work resonate so well
with people who the man himself would have hated even more
than he hated everyone else?
Now, I don't think I'm qualified to answer this question.
I don't actually think anyone really is.
There's probably a lot of different reasons,
but from what I can gather,
it seems like the answer lies in the specifics
of how Lovecraft saw the world,
in the place that his approach actually came from.
"'When Lovecraft was three years old,
his father had a breakdown
and was committed to a mental hospital.
He died there five years later.
His mother also frequently suffered from similar problems
and later died in the same hospital.
Lovecraft suffered from periods of severe anxiety and depression.
He had to drop out of high school
and often isolated himself for long periods at a time.
He saw himself as a temporary visitor
to a strange and unwelcoming world.
This is present even in one of Lovecraft's earliest stories,
The Outsider.
The narrator escapes from being trapped within a decaying castle,
but his search for human contact is frustrated
when the people he finds run away in horror.
He turns and sees a detestable and ghoulish creature
has entered the room.
To his shock, he realizes he's looking into a mirror."
All of his best works draw into close focus
not some generic fear of outsiders,
but the anxieties and fears that come with being an outsider,
of being in a world that doesn't really understand you,
and perhaps of not being fully able to understand yourself.
So there is a fairly decent reason here
why someone might be drawn to these works,
even if the author was deeply problematic.
And this appears to have been true to some degree
at the time in a strange way.
Lovecraft was pretty open about the problems
he had with homosexuality.
However, several of his closest friends were gay,
including the poets Hart Crane and Samuel Loveman
and Robert Hayward Barlow,
who he worked closely with on numerous stories
and who Lovecraft made the executor of his literary estate
in the event of his death.
It's partially due to Barlow
that so much of Lovecraft's writing
has been preserved over the years,
given how he wasn't all that popular at the time.
The deeply bigoted belief in a link
between homosexuality and pedophilia
is invoked, this time on purpose,
in the film as well.
There's a scene in Cthulhu where Russell is arrested
on manufactured charges of being a pedophile.
-"You're under arrest for murder." -"Oh, come on."
-"Rape of a minor." -"Oh, wait, you can't--"
-"Trespass--" -"The event is positioned
as an extension of his mistreatment
by the rest of the town.
We're seeing the kind of alienation
the original stories had to invent a foreign cult
to get across,
but translated into actual things
people do experience."
-"Oh, yeah, you like this? Faggot goes off to jail?"
The easiness and convenience
with which having a different sexual preference
is equated with criminality
is something that real people deal with even today.
For some people,
the intellectualized existential problems
Lovecraft had originally written to explore
cease to be theoretical
and start to communicate familiar experiences
the same way Edgar Allan Poe's writing can be
to someone who's lost a loved one,
or the way Halloween explores
the suburban fear of one's neighbors,
or Dracula puts words to a deeper understanding
of the antagonism between different classes
in our social hierarchy.
For those who've been treated like this
in the name of a religion
or simply by their surrounding society
because of its horrific expectations,
have they not come the closest a person can
in the real world
to the central Lovecraftian experience?
Have they not, in a sense,
glimpsed the face of an uncaring universe?
-"He was a guy that definitely did not get laid much,
you know, and a guy that was
an alien amongst us."
Del Toro still hasn't gotten to make
the Mountains of Madness adaptation
he wanted to make and I wanted to see,
but what's weird is,
as I've grown older
and become more interested in stories
that are more compelling
than Lovecraft's original works,
it seems that Del Toro has as well.
In a recent interview about The Shape of Water,
he said,
These are not concerns that I had
when I was nine or seven.
The Shape of Water doesn't have any elements
that would be regarded
as traditionally Lovecraftian
by purists like Giles
or the teenager I used to be,
but its story gets at what I think
makes Lovecraft actually work
in the first place.
Human stories about our alienation
from each other and our lonelinesses,
our victimization by forces
beyond our control
that see us as outside the norm,
and how we can at least
partially rectify this by
learning to see the beauty
in something previously seen as alien.
In a sense,
it's a story about the people of Innsmouth
who happily chose to join
with the Deep Ones,
quite literally embracing otherness,
raising children who literally
learn to love to be different.
Now, the film's perspectives
and plot and texture
make it not really invite
much of a comparison with Lovecraft
in a straightforward viewing,
but maybe that's proof
of how good it is.
The Shape of Water has
so successfully excavated
all the garbage away
from its spiritual predecessor
that despite depicting something
that directly happened
in a story del Toro
has definitely read,
the comparison still feels strange,
wrong almost.
This film captures the beautiful,
human, mesmerizing center
of Lovecraft's writing.
It's the kind of story he could,
or perhaps should,
have been writing all along.
For me, there's something
personally wonderful about
finally really coming to
an understanding of a film
that touched me in ways
I didn't realize
and that never really
got much recognition.
Right as a film that understands
this just as well gets released
and actually gets major recognition
and even wins an Oscar.
I am an immigrant,
unlike many, many of you,
and in the last 25 years,
I've been living in a country
all of our own,
because I think that
the greatest thing our art does
and our industry does
is to erase the lines in the sand.
We should continue doing that
when the world tells us
to make them deeper.
While it's easy and correct
to be dubious about the value
of winning an Oscar,
I do think the success of a film
like this is a really hopeful sign
for the future of how people
see that which is alien to them.
There's a philosopher
named Julia Kristeva
whose work was pretty formative for me.
I discovered her
through her being quoted
in a series of critical essays
on Lovecraft,
one by Gina Whisker,
entitled Spawn of the Pit.
The quote went,
By recognizing our uncanny strangeness,
we shall neither suffer from it
nor enjoy it from the outside.
The foreigner is within me.
Hence, we are all foreigners.
If I am a foreigner,
then there are no foreigners.
Why be alien to each other
when we are all alien to ourselves?
So, what have we learned
about how to adapt Lovecraft?
Well, I think there's a point here
about how we have to decide
what really makes his work good
in the first place,
what the core truths in his work are
that ought to survive
into a future they inspire.
An adaptation, to me at least,
only needs fidelity
to what really matters
about the text,
and neglecting to bring across
other aspects like
the finer points of its philosophy
or its particular linguistic flourishes
or certain characters
or even its racism or homophobia
isn't a failure to be fully faithful
to the original work.
It's demonstrating
a successful understanding
of why those stories
were worth reading about
in the first place
in spite of those flaws.
In focusing on a person's experiences
and treatment for their sexuality
or on a relationship
with someone seen by others
as an alien outsider,
these works explore the originals
and their feelings of otherness
better than Lovecraft did.
You don't have to go find a copy
of this 10-year-old obscure film
if you don't want to.
It's not perfect by any means,
and lots of the criticism
the film's received is valid.
Even the director's commentary
opens by admitting
they aren't fully happy with the film.
There are 85 locations in this movie.
Ridiculous.
It's certainly nowhere near as good
as the best film ever,
Gremlins 2.
But it meant something to me
and was very important to me
in a formative period of my life,
and sometimes that's kind of
more important than the writing
or execution.
As I look out into the internet
and find many other queer fans
of Lovecraft's work
and writers in some form
inspired by these feelings themselves,
the wealth of literature
exploring this side of his writing
and films taking up
radically humanizing perspectives
even towards that which might
literally be considered monstrous,
I can't help but feel
that there's a side of Lovecraft's work
the man himself died
unable to fully comprehend.
And in a way, that's fitting, isn't it?
But there's one other great story
inspired at least partially
by elements of Lovecraft,
and I'm going to talk about it
soon on my channel.
Join me in the future
when I reveal spectacularly
why I filmed segments for this video
at night in the woods.
Oh, I just kind of gave it away then,
didn't I?
[♪ music ♪
Hey.
Thanks for watching, everybody.
This one was quite hard to make
for reasons that are probably obvious.
I'm supported by all these lovely people
over on Patreon.
Backers get videos a few days early
and also get to make suggestions
on changes before the other version
goes out,
and they get some bonus extra videos
every now and then.
I still need to finish one
about the making of the control delete video,
but there's just so much footage
to cut together.
I'm basically making a little documentary
about making this silly YouTube video.
Oh, and since I don't do readings
of the credits outside of longer videos,
I'm trying a new thing
where I stream myself to $10 back
as doing editing
and take live suggestions
and show off my sort of process.
Last night, I did a three-hour stream
of me making changes to this video.
So thanks to Mallow,
who was in the chat and gave me the idea
of pointing out that Huelbeck sucks.
I wasn't sure if I should do it,
so it was nice getting the input
that I probably ought to,
and thanks to everyone else
who singled out other changes
and fixes to mistakes
I can now pretend were never made at all.
I'd also like to say a special thank you
to the over 100 people
who reached out to me
when I asked on Twitter
for LGBT fans of Lovecraft
to get in touch a few months ago.
Your notes and contributions
were really great
and helped me think a lot
about this topic
and helped me ascertain
that it wasn't all just me,
that I wasn't imagining all of this,
that other people felt this way.
You were all really helpful and lovely,
and this video wouldn't exist
without your kindness and support.
I hope everyone had a happy Pride Month.
Not that you have to stop being proud now.
You know, by all means, please continue.
I'm going to go back into my hole
and feel sorry for myself
for another 11 months,
but you do whatever makes you feel good.
