Mozart's 1787 opera Don Giovanni tells the story of the Spanish legend Don Juan,
a man who sleeps with as many women as possible because he thinks he can repent before he dies.
In Mozart's version, the Don seems at first like just a generic sexual predator prick.
When a woman accuses him of rape, he ices her old man and retreats to his palazzo.
But we soon learn something weirder is going on.
When one of his jilted lovers shows up, Don Giovanni's servant Leporello explains to her
that the Don keeps a catalog of all the women he's conquered.
640 in Italy, 231 in Germany, 100 in France, 91 in Turkey, and in Spain, 1003.
This catalog aria is what a boring white weirdo named Kierkegaard
called the most epic moment of the opera.
It's the moment that we learn that Don Giovanni is not just a predator,
but that he's actually fucking insane.
He doesn't care whether the women are young or old, beautiful or ugly, rich or poor.
He seduces them all the same, just to satisfy his manic urge to add them to the list.
In the 21st century, there are men who are really like this.
They're called pickup artists, and they want you to buy their erotic memoirs.
Oh man, here we go.
A lot has been said about how pickup artists are manipulative psychos who disregard women's
wishes and use deception and coercion to have sex that's borderline rapey,
and at best, highly quote-quote problematic, unquote, and italics.
I'm not going to repeat those feminist objections in this video,
because I assume that my audience is familiar with them already.
What I want to talk about instead is why.
Why do some men become obsessed with sleeping with a lot of women in the first place?
I mean, even some pretty normal dudes tend to start this macho bragging
when they get a few too many drinks in them.
A napkin and pen are produced, lists are drawn up, advanced algebra is involved,
there are scholastic debates about what counts as a lay.
But before I penetrate this topic too deeply,
I want to pull out to cock block some premature objections.
First, I'm not arguing that male promiscuity is in itself a bad thing.
I have no problem with man-sluts.
In fact, I'm a bit of a man-slut myself.
I'm just a girl who can't say no.
Second, I'm not saying that game is inherently wrong,
or that men shouldn't work to improve their appearance and social skills.
Hell, I do that myself.
I mean, I don't do 80 push-ups a day because I want to live longer.
Fuck that shit.
I do it because I want to look good with a backward swastika
betazzled on my shaved and oiled chest.
So why would a man want to sleep with hundreds of women?
Well, you might be thinking the answer is obvious,
namely that sex feels good and so it's natural that men would want to have a lot of it.
Well, that's what I thought too, at least until I probed a little deeper
and discovered how fucking naive that is.
A kind of famous pickup artist called Roosh V wrote a book called
BANG, which is a guide that purports to teach men to sleep with lots of women.
Now, the first thing I noticed about BANG is that the act of sex itself
is not described at all until page 111 of a 140-page book,
and the discussion lasts less than one page.
That's right, only four short paragraphs of this book are actually about branging.
There's one paragraph about how to put a penis in a vagina,
one paragraph about the three sex positions Roosh knows,
one paragraph about how being good at sex doesn't matter,
and one paragraph about how cunnilingus is a waste of time.
It is good stuff.
Roosh's total lack of concern for sexual technique actually comes as a real surprise,
since in the 111 pages leading up to it,
he shows meticulous care for every other aspect of seduction,
from the precise angle to approach a woman at the bar
to the detailed flowchart procedure for overcoming resistance to every stage leading up to sex.
It turns out that rejection is just like dying in a video game.
You start the level over and try again.
Never take no for an answer.
The rapey stuff aside, some of the advice he gives is actually decent.
Roosh knows how to single-handedly unclasp a bra in a second,
and he's scientifically discovered the least awkward way to get out a condom,
which he actually practices putting on quickly.
He's probably a fucking virtuoso at putting the condom on.
Make a video tutorial, Roosh.
Stop fucking whining about feminism.
Get the banana out and actually teach us something, you beautiful fool.
It's honestly kind of a relief when you get to the page of...
bang, about sex, because it's the only part of the book where Roosh relaxes,
until the moment the penis enters the vagina.
Congratulate yourself on the notch.
Roosh has been trying to control everything with scientific precision.
The fact that it's just anything goes with regard to sex itself is the tip-off that bang,
is not really a book about banging.
It's a guidebook on how to get a penis into a vagina by any means necessary.
The most absurd thing about Roosh is that he doesn't really seem to like sex very much.
He describes it as an act whereby a man inserts a rod-shaped mass of
engorged tissue into a woman's lubricated cavity.
And where have we heard this before?
Because at the end of the day, sex, you're gonna be impaling her with your ugly, engorged penis.
It's pretty clear that Roosh is not a hedonist.
He's not pursuing pleasure.
There's an important distinction between a genuine voluptuary,
someone like Casanova who actually seems to like women and enjoys spending time with them,
and a mere list-making maniac like Roosh or Don Giovanni.
Now, on the Don Giovanniian scale of things, I'm not really a very prolific man-slut myself,
but there have been certain periods in my life of, shall we say, definite man-sluttery.
And one of the things I've learned from my experience is that
jackhammering a woman for five to ten minutes is usually not enough to get her off.
If you actually care about female pleasure, you're gonna have to develop some other skills.
This has been an expensive Cunnilingus joke.
Try the wine!
But I guess it's not a big surprise that pickup artists don't care about female pleasure.
The more interesting and surprising thing is that they don't particularly care very
much about their own pleasure either, or at least it's not their primary focus.
The point of sex for Roosh seems to be to prove again and again that he's a real alpha male,
and that he's not a Warcraft-playing beta like he used to be.
He wants to sleep with a lot of women because of the masculine prestige he thinks it brings him,
and he wants the women he sleeps with to be conventionally beautiful for the same reason.
BANG!
It's honestly one of the most depressing books I've ever read, and I'm a Kafka fan!
It's a window into Roosh's soul, which is a void as blank as a stair and as dark as
the cover of the book itself.
To look at the world through Roosh's eyes is to look at a world where no real companionship
between men and women is possible, where sex is a solitary act of self-assertion
that never leads to a connection between minds.
There's no pleasure, and no real eroticism, and BANG!
Only the cold machinations of a man who hates women,
single-mindedly obsessing over his own sexual high score.
This is a miserable view of life, and of sex.
And I say this not as someone who believes sex is sacred and only good when you're in love,
or anything fucking gay like that.
Even a one-night stand can allow you to have some kind of real connection with someone,
but only if you're honest and empathetic toward each other and aren't just using
each other's bodies so you can add another name to your fucking spreadsheet.
God damn.
I always thought one of the benefits of sex is that it allows you to escape the walls
of your own mind prison and enjoy a less lonely existence, even if only for a couple hours.
Of course, it doesn't always work out that way.
I'm certainly not saying unrepentant fuck-sluttery doesn't have some bad consequences.
No matter how honest and careful you try to be, if you have enough BANGS,
there's gonna come a moment when the person you were just totally casually nose strings
attached to banging turns to you and says,
I have feelings for you that I've never felt for anyone before,
and you're gonna think,
oh shit, I fucked up.
I fucked up bad.
And you did fuck up, but it's gonna happen to you too, motherfucker.
You're gonna wake up one morning and the person you were just totally casually nose strings
attached, not a big deal, banging, is gonna walk out the door, and then suddenly,
oh god, you'll feel the fire burning in the depths of your chest, and you'll wonder,
why doesn't she love me?
What are these feelings that are happening to me?
Am I dying?
I hate this.
This is supposed to be casual.
Casual!
I didn't know my soul could tame these depths.
Contrapoints.
Harken to my voice.
What the fuck?
Who are you?
Why, I'm the spirit of the little thing you may have forgotten about called love.
Get out of here!
I don't do that shit anymore.
Well, I'm afraid it's too late.
You see, my child is already inside of me.
Well, I will drown that child.
I will feel nothing!
Oh, god damn it.
God damn you.
That's...
It's just crass.
Try the wine, motherfucker.
All right, give me that.
I'll try the wine.
I'll suck your goddamn cock, too.
Oh, yeah.
No, stop.
We're not ending there.
This video needs a lesson.
Because I'm a moral person, god damn it.
I'm a socialist feminist.
Well, look, I'll say two things.
First, people have this idea that feminism means that men can't be men and sex is over
and it's going to be like the matriarchal version of The Handmaid's Tale.
But no, that's not what it is.
I mean, there's maybe like 1 or 0.1% of feminists who think all sex is rape and men are pigs
and all that stupid shit.
But those women are sad and pathetic and no one listens to them.
Really, the sexual requirements of feminism are very minimal.
Don't rape people.
Don't harass them.
Don't abuse them.
Don't shout at them in the streets.
It's really just not that hard.
Second, for your sake, stop counting how many people you fucking slept with.
Women all seem to mysteriously have no idea how many people they've fucked.
This is charming and adorable and men should emulate it.
Because in the real world, Don Giovanni is a pretty unhappy thing to be.
Without Mozart's intensely erotic music propping him up, the Don would come off as cold and joyless.
If your goal is to live a voluptuous life, then sure, sleep with lots of women.
Sleep with lots of dudes or animals or whatever you're into.
But only if they want to.
And only if you want to.
I mean, you can embrace absolute pleasure with just one partner or even by yourself.
Human life isn't very long and we're all stuck in this together.
So forget about your fucking list and go spread some pleasure in the world.
But to be clear, do not spray your white high pleasure all over anyone unless they want you to.
It's just, it's just not that hard to understand.
Goddamn.
If you liked this video so much, why don't you bang it?
But also click like, please.
Special thanks to Roman Ilyashev, Kat Stass, Johan Michael Comfort, Nick Wolf, Garrett Lathy,
Vorone, NoNoNo, Heterodox, and the other patrons who helped me make this video.
If you'd like to become a patron, check the link in the thing.
Other YouTubers call it the doobly-doo.
Why do they call it that?
Kind of makes me angry.
