The term Oscar bait is relatively new, and although the concept has been around for a
few decades, it was the 78th Academy Awards in 2006 that indirectly popularized the term
outside of film circles into household use.
The 78th Academy Awards became infamous for its best picture winner, as it was an exceptionally
strong year for thoughtful adult dramas, and as far as the nominees went, there was really
only one wrong answer.
Crash beat Brokeback Mountain, Capote, Good Night and Good Luck, and Munich, despite not
winning Best Picture at any other major film awards or even being nominated for Best Picture
at the Golden Globes.
Several lessons were learned that night.
1.
That aggressive, for-your-consideration campaigns work, regardless of merit, and 2.
Meditations on the subject of race that place the root of the problems on flawed individuals
rather than historical, systemic, and structural injustices will win awards.
We have seen this play out time and time again since Crash won Best Picture.
That said, though Crash beating favorite Brokeback Mountain was controversial at the
time, history has only been more unkind to Crash.
Yale professor Xuan Su wrote that Crash imagines racial encounter along the lines of individual
experience of hate and forgiveness without exploring questions of structural inequality
and public redress.
In 2009, writer and cultural critic Ta-Nehisi Coates called it the worst movie of the decade,
stating,
Instead, you have arguments and propaganda violently bumping into each other, impressed
with their own quirkiness, and calling it the apotheosis of a kind of unthinking, incurious,
nihilistic multiculturalism.
There's this narrative that's emerged surrounding Netflix's Bright that audiences
loved it and critics hated it.
It's hard to measure Bright's success against the typical Hollywood release, which measures
success with box-officer turns.
Netflix doesn't release metrics, but according to Nielsen, which has recently started recording
metrics for streaming services, Bright got about 22 million eyeballs.
That is to say, about 11 million people, assuming an average of about two eyeballs per person,
during the first three days of its release.
Assuming every person who watched Bright at home would have paid money to see it in theaters,
that would put it roughly on track with Transformers 4 and just behind Thor Ragnarok.
Very respectable, especially for a non-franchise film, but this again assumes that everyone
who watched Bright in those three days in the comfort of their own homes would have
gone outside into the world and watched it in theaters.
A mighty big jump.
The sub-narrative to this is the conspiracy narrative, which is stupid but has become
part of the discussion and must therefore be addressed.
That big Hollywood is paying off critics to pan Bright because the new model Bright
represents is a huge threat to their revenue.
Which, you know, it kind of is, but you all have got to stop with the conspiracy theories
around critics being paid off because the Hollywood Illuminati are trying to crush your movie.
There is plenty to dislike about Bright.
Fairy lives don't matter today.
It is true that despite the critical reception, Bright could possibly represent a paradigm
shift in filmmaking, away from the focused theatrical experience and towards streaming,
all while not needing to sacrifice big names or budgets.
Netflix took a lot of risks with Bright, and even if this project wasn't the greatest
triumph, it will be interesting to see where they take other projects in the future.
Although I do question their decision not to hire a screenwriter for Bright, and to
go ahead with the project completely screenwriter-less, I don't know, they already ordered a sequel
from Trigger Warning Entertainment, maybe this time they'll hire a screenwriter.
Shit, did I forget to endorse this?
Anyway, if this is your trash, I'm not trying to judge.
I have seen Showgirls dozens of times, and I just released a video defending Twilight.
That said, even though this movie kind of came and went and everyone else has already,
you know, forgotten about it, I cannot stop thinking about Bright.
So we're going to make a thing out of it.
That's right, we're making a thing.
Fairy lives don't matter today.
So, to start, I am going to simply, factually recount the events of the film without commentary,
questions, or asides.
Alright?
Alright.
Credits roll with a variety of shots of an alternate reality Los Angeles, mostly consisting
of orc graffiti mentioning a dark lord and orc antipathy towards the police.
The story proper opens with street cop Ward, played by Will Smith, getting shot by an orc
robbing a bodega while his partner Jacoby, also an orc, buys him a burrito.
But to some time later, Ward has recovered, his wife tells him that there is a fairy in
the bird feeder, she wants him to kill it.
He goes outside, criticizes his neighbors for playing into gangsta stereotypes, says
this
Fairy lives don't matter today.
And crushes the fairy to death with a broom.
Upstairs, Ward explains to his daughter that racism is bad.
All of the races are different, okay?
And just because they're different doesn't mean anybody's smarter.
Jacoby shows up to offer Ward a ride to work, embarrassing Ward in front of his neighbors.
On the way to work, Ward continues to be a jerk to Jacoby, blaming him for getting
shot, and Jacoby suggests that the root of Ward's racism against him is that he isn't
getting laid.
They drive through an elf district, Ward complains some more, nothing happens, and then they
continue to work.
In the locker room, Ward's co-workers all make bigoted remarks about Jacoby, and justify
their bigotry by the fact that the orcs had sided with the Dark Lord 2,000 years ago.
During assignment, Ward is assigned to partner with Jacoby, he complains to Margaret Cho
who blames the orc diversity department.
Jacoby has a kick me sign on his back, his co-workers laugh at him.
While on the beat, Ward yells at Jacoby over nothing.
They get a call because of a crazy sword-wielding dirty man who mentions a Dark Lord returning.
They joke with Sheriff's Deputy Rodriguez about their shared struggles with racism.
They take in the dirty man.
Dirty man tells Jacoby and Orcish that Ward is special.
Back at the station, Internal Affairs goads Ward into forcing Jacoby to admit that he
had intentionally let the perp go because they're both orcs.
The Magic Task Force, aka the Magic Feds, show up and reveal that the dirty man is in
a group called Shield of Light.
They talk about a group of renegade elves called the Inferni, who need three magic wands
in order to resurrect the Dark Lord.
He explains that most Brights are elves, but humans can be Brights too, if only one in
a million.
Ward and Jacoby get called to a shootout where they find a bunch of supernatural death, this,
and a fragile kick-ass waif named Tika with a magic wand who appears not to speak English.
The Enforcement show up, put the magic wand in a bag, and tell Ward that he needs to go
outside now and murder Jacoby, or the corrupt cops will kill both of them.
Ward goes outside, accuses Jacoby of letting the orc perp go, and Jacoby admits that he
did let the perp go, but only because he realizes he'd chased down the wrong kid after losing
the real shooter in the crowd.
Inside the house, the corrupt cops decide to kill Ward, Jacoby, and Tika no matter what
Ward does.
They go outside, tell Ward it's time, and Ward turns around and murders all four of
them.
Another group of gangsters show up, led by a guy named Poison, declare that the wand
belongs to the Barrio, they escape, run into an invisible wall, have a terrible slow-mo
car crash, which they then walk away from with no apparent injuries.
Inferni leader Layla arrives with her Inferni at the original scene.
They murder an entire Spanish-speaking family of witnesses, including a baby, and begin
the hunt for Ward, Jacoby, and Tika.
Ward and Jacoby hide, are discovered by Poison's gang, one of them grabs the wand, and explodes.
This is what happens to non-Brites who touch magic wands.
They escape, hide in a strip club, where they are found yet again by Poison's gang.
A gunfight is about to commence, but then the Inferni show up and kill everyone, while
failing to capture Ward and Jacoby.
Ward and Jacoby escape, talk about their feelings in a gas station bathroom while Layla whimpers
in the corner.
Ward calls Rodriguez, who demands to see the wand.
He calls the magic feds, but the Inferni are tapping the phone lines and cut the line with
an axe.
Rodriguez cuffs them for their own safety, and is then shot and killed by the Inferni.
Another fight scene, Ward, Jacoby, and Tika escape yet again, only to be captured by a
gang of orcs.
Take your fat Shrek looking ass back to your vehicle and drive the fuck home to Fiona.
The leader explains that he's angry that they brought guns into that first club they
escaped into, demands the wand, beats them, and then stabs Jacoby.
He orders his son, Mikey, Mikey the Orc, to shoot Jacoby, but then wouldn't you know,
it's the kid Jacoby let go, and he can't kill him.
So his dad shoots Jacoby instead.
But Tika rips the wand from her skin, revealing her Brightlyhood, and resurrects Jacoby while
the orcs… let her.
The orcs kneel, and then they are allowed to leave without a word.
Ward chastises Tika for not letting them know she is a Bright, or that she can speak English.
She tells them that the Inferni plan to restore the Dark Lord to power, using the wand has
crippled her, she's dying, and Jacoby, grateful for her saving his life, convinces Ward to
take her back to the house where they found her.
The Inferni are waiting for them, another fight scene, Jacoby shoots Layla, Ward brings
Tika to the pool of healing.
Layla somehow survives her shooting, hangs Jacoby, this happens, Jacoby shoots the wand
out of Layla's hand, but runs out of ammo.
Ward grabs the wand, surprise surprise, he is a Bright.
Jacoby tells him the magic word, and he defeats Layla.
Jacoby tries to get them outside the burning house, when he realizes Ward didn't follow
him, he goes back into the burning building and rescues him.
The orcs that were going to kill them earlier respect him now.
After all that, Ward says this, they explain their side of the story to the magic feds
in the hospital.
The magic feds take the wand, at the memorial for Rodriguez and the four cops Ward murdered,
they see Tika in the crowd, a fairy flies at the camera, the end.
So this is not a book of Henry situation, this is not a concept so squirrely that only
a complete change of genre would have salvaged it.
Obviously there were huge problems with the screenplay, but nothing that a couple of rewrites
couldn't have fixed.
In the broadest of strokes, there's nothing fundamentally wrong with the premise or the
story itself.
A fantasy setting that resembles our modern universe, with the central characters as two
cops of different fantasy races that don't like each other, but have to learn to work
together when they come into possession of what is effectively a weapon of mass destruction.
You could just as easily imagine the two cops as Legolas and Gimli, and that could make
for a fun unique romp.
And it's also not like the elements weren't in place to make it work, specifically with
the two mains.
Smith and Edgerton actually have great chemistry.
No holes?
Huh?
Uh, only the ones that I was born with.
How are your holes?
The fuck can you make a shootout awkward?
Ward is a garden variety jerk who disrespects Jacoby, who happens to be an awkward dork.
I thought it'd be nice to get me a ride on your first date.
But through shared hardship, they learn to value each other.
A modern take on a traditional fantasy trope.
Who thought I'd die fighting side by side with an elf?
What about side by side with a friend?
This dynamic doesn't live up to its potential because of the poor plotting and character
development.
Again, why didn't they hire a screenwriter?
Weird.
But you can see the intent there in a lot of their interactions.
I used to be like you, thinking save everybody and fix everything.
Now I just pretend to be a good dude.
The glut of action scenes is a problem because much of these fight scenes with the Inferni
don't advance anything.
Several times they are in danger, escape, exposit some while Lulu cowers, more danger,
they escape, repeat.
They gain nothing, lose nothing, and learn nothing for nearly an hour of the film's
runtime until Tikka saves Jacoby using the wand.
This should have been the midpoint of the film, not the end of Act 2 as it isn't a
final product.
And the second half of Act 2 should have been built around these three building a dynamic
and learning to trust each other and care about each other, giving us, the audience,
the chance to care about her before she starts dying, and about Jacoby and Ward's dynamic.
If Tikka were to begin trusting Ward and Jacoby during the midpoint, they could have developed
a rapport, and rather than her overextending herself with the wand being potentially fatal,
a plot point which makes no sense because this doesn't happen to any other wand users,
maybe have her be fatally injured in some other way later, and then, the audience having
now built up some emotional investment in these characters, Ward and Jacoby spend the
third act trying to save her, cue the climax, the end.
My point is, it wouldn't have been that hard to bring this up to the level of...
okay.
A lot of the worldbuilding is clumsily explained by characters that have nothing to do with
the narrative, like this guy.
You ever notice how most brides are elves, and elves run the world?
Coincidence?
Yeah, we never see him again after this scene, and organic worldbuilding that isn't exposition
word-dumped from characters that are relevant to the plot comes at the cost of unnecessarily
long action scenes that take up so much of the film's runtime.
But this movie is gritty.
See, it needs to reflect harsh truths about racism in LA.
You know, like Crash did.
Look at all that urban gangsta flavor.
Ahhhhhhhhhhh
A major symptom of these structure problems comes in the form of the poor execution of
setup and payoff.
The trip to Elftown at the beginning is a setup that never pays off.
They go to Elftown, Elftown is set up.
It is a huge pointed setup.
Ain't nothing over here but rich-ass elves just running the world and shopping.
Not only do they never go back to Elftown again, Elftown isn't even mentioned.
Also they couldn't find a better name for it than Elftown?
Like Beverly Hills isn't called WEALTHTOWN.
Also where the fuck is this supposed to be?
It looks like downtown LA but Beverly Hills is like 10 miles away.
Nevermind.
The fact that Ward has a loving family totally undermines the character they're going for.
You don't want me as a friend.
Yeah.
Cause besides taking out the fairy LAPD style, you seem to be doing alright.
You have a loving family, a daughter you care for, a wife who makes you coffee with napkins
and you joke around with.
Made doubly confusing by this line.
Physical love.
A relic from an earlier draft of the script where Ward was estranged from his wife.
But if they were going to give Ward a nice wife and give them a happy relationship, then
they probably should have cut this exchange.
And the setup of the family pays off not at all.
All it does is undermine the badass loner thing they're trying to go for with Ward.
It is a weak incentive for him to maybe betray Jacoby, maybe for a little bit.
But really, why does he even have a wife and daughter?
They get the family out of danger immediately, and then the family only comes back at the
very end.
If you want to play up this I'm a bad dude with no friends angle, don't give him a family.
These are wasted story elements in a story with already way too much clumsy, inorganic
worldbuilding.
Poison's gang, for instance.
They are never mentioned again after the Titty Bar shootout.
We gonna Titty Bar gunfight die.
Which wouldn't be so bad if there had been some growth or development during the previous
three shootouts with Poison's gang, but there isn't.
All we get is that this is what happens when a non-bright touches a wand, a thing that
we already knew, and the orcs getting mad at the trio as justification to capture them
and shoot Jacoby later, a plot point which is really weak.
These three spend a full half hour of the film on the run from Poison's gang, who
does not matter, and has nothing to do with the plot.
Moreover, no one seems to care that even if they get this magic wand, they cannot use it.
Perhaps the worst failure of setup and payoff is that Mikey the orc, the kid whom Jacoby
helped escape earlier, that we meet later in the orc hideout, at first you're like
hey some setup that was paid off.
Jacoby's mercy and good deeds saves him.
But then Mikey's dad shoots Jacoby anyway, and Tika has to use the wand to resurrect him.
So this setup, the fact that Jacoby showed Mikey mercy, is of no consequence.
There is no meaningful outcome to Jacoby showing this kid mercy.
He gets shot either way.
Bad setup and payoff.
And once again, in the earlier draft of the script, Mikey the orc actually did spare Jacoby.
But in the David Ayer rewrite, it was decided that apparently that wasn't dramatic enough.
And as in the example with the estranged wife, they kept the setup where the payoff no longer makes sense.
I started with the focus on structure because flawed though it is, the story is there and
this could have easily been fixed in the screenplay stage.
This could have worked.
But really, the devil is in the details.
A major part of film editing is just as much deciding what to cut out as what to keep in.
Elements in a story need narrative utility.
Let's examine a scene. Ward kills the fairy.
What narrative purpose does this serve?
Fairies in this universe appear to be pests.
Which is fine, but either way, Ward's solution is cruel and inhumane.
So from a narrative utility standpoint, either it is trying to demonstrate Ward's antipathy
towards fantasy things, or it is setting up Ward as a blood psychopath.
Here's why neither of these things work.
One, in-universe, magic is seen as separate from all things normal.
That's whatever you want.
The magic wand is magic, but that doesn't mean that orcs, elves, humans, or fairies are.
They just exist in this universe and they share it.
Therefore, humans aren't necessarily separate from it.
They are just another race in this world.
Like they are in The Lord of the Rings.
So using this as setup as Ward magic hater doesn't work because the fairy is just another
non-magical element in this universe.
Number two, is it setting up Ward as a blood psychopath?
Well, he's kind of a jerk, but he isn't exceptionally cruel after this scene.
He drops his four corrupt colleagues because he correctly assumes they are about to kill
both of them.
Either way, we never see him abusing his power in relation to relative powerlessness,
as it relates to him killing what is in this universe effectively an animal.
So he doesn't grow from this, learn to be more kind to the powerless,
nor is it foreshadowing some other cruelty.
Like imagine if this movie had begun with Ward instead killing like a rat or a raccoon
or a cat or something in the same manner.
Yikes, we might say.
Not a good dude.
This must be going somewhere.
But it doesn't.
It's what I do.
And this isn't about Will Smith being mean.
It's about nobody acts like a person in this movie.
The worst offender is the climactic scene in which Ward discovers that he is a bright.
Everyone is beaten up pretty badly, and then Layla starts with this.
What have you done to my sister?
What have you done to her?
Which neither sets up anything nor pays off anything or relates to anything that we've learned about the Inferni.
And don't start with it setting up extended universe crap.
Jacoby breaks free of being hung, shoots the wand out of Layla's hand,
and then Ward starts like sassing him.
Nick, if you were aiming at the wand, that was a really good shot.
But shoot her in her head!
And nobody is like moving or hiding or trying to defend themselves as they might be doing in a tense shootout.
And Jacoby moves to shoot her again, but...
I can't. I'm out.
He says this like he's got a headache and he just realizes he left his aspirin at home.
And all of these characters are within about ten feet of each other.
Nothing is stopping Layla from lunging for the wand with her other not-blown-off hand,
or Jacoby from bum-rushing her.
And it takes like a full minute for Ward to grab that wand.
And then he gets it and he's like,
What do I do?
Hey Nick, I got the wand!
What now?
And still nobody's moving?
Like, they're still in their spots.
Like, well, they can't move or that would ruin the blocking.
The unkillable Layla doesn't even stand up when Leeloo tells Ward the magic word.
The war word is Vaequaras.
Dracarys.
And in the time it takes him to process this,
Layla still could have grabbed it from him, but she doesn't.
She stays put.
Like, you know, we couldn't have set up the magic word before this scene somehow.
This scene is just astonishing in how much it doesn't work from every angle.
Because no one acts like a person who is in danger.
I'm out.
But it's Tika who stands out as the biggest problem character development-wise,
as there's never any reason for Ward or Jacoby or the audience to be emotionally invested in her.
There's no reason for her to withhold that she speaks English as long as she does.
She speaks English pretty good now, too.
Now I trust you.
Or her brightly-hood.
Or to follow them around as long as she does,
if no trust or emotional bond has been built up.
By the end of the movie, when she's dying,
neither Ward nor Jacoby nor the audience have any reason to care about her.
Tika acting like a weird child alien is, yep, you guessed it,
a relic from an earlier draft where she was a literal elf child,
and that's why they were carting her around.
So I guess when they added the titty-bar gunfight,
We're gonna titty-bar gunfight die.
that means they couldn't have Tika be a literal child anymore.
So they aged her up to like a 25-year-old, but changed literally nothing else.
But Tika is emblematic of the bigger problem with the film
as it ties into theme and world-building.
She's just poorly thought out.
She's just as much a MacGuffin as the wand is.
When she is deigned the thinnest of backstories, it is pure function.
You're gonna need to unfuck this.
No motivation, no emotional core, nothing.
Her defection from the Inferni is motivated by nothing other than Dark Lord bad,
but we never have any idea of who she is,
so there's never any reason to care about her.
The only character who even consistently comes close to acting like a person
with pathos and motivations is Jacoby.
Hey, Sophia, what's up, rockstar?
So, like Crash feels like it was written by space aliens
trying to understand why humans are racist,
You get on your knees and suck my motherfucking dick while you're down there!
so too it applies to Bright.
To paraphrase Ta-Nehisi Coates' comments on Crash,
I don't think there is a single human being in Bright,
except for, arguably, the Orc.
Both Crash and Bright reach to capture a truth,
but capture nothing,
because it fails utterly to capture the way people talk and think and act,
or how systems work within a society.
Man, you know what they say,
once with the Dark Lord, always with the Dark Lord.
Now, this normally wouldn't be that noteworthy.
It would just be a premise with lots of potential
that unfortunately led to a bad movie.
But then Bright had to go and make Bright's self about race.
I said, Orcs ain't cops.
He said, now we are.
Then he went outside into his Audi car.
The intellectual grandfather of the type of fantasy shown in Bright
is J.R.R. Tolkien,
whose works directly influenced all contemporary fantasy
from Dungeons and Dragons to Willow to Skyrim to Bright.
Lord of the Rings is also a launching point of discussion
as it pertains to allegory and racial coding
as it applies to works of fantasy.
Many over the years have pointed to The Lord of the Rings
as an obvious allegory for, for instance, World War II,
a claim which Tolkien virulently denied,
stating in a preface to a reprint of Fellowship of the Ring,
I cordially dislike allegory in all its manifestations,
and always have done so
since I grew old and wary enough to detect its presence.
Tolkien's attitude was that
if people are going to read allegory and do his work,
fine, have a party,
but not to assume that he intended any to be there.
He drew from history, yes,
but he wasn't making an intentional statement about it.
Now the thing is, Tolkien, of course,
existed in, absorbed, and reproduced
the colonialist worldview of his day.
No, I don't think he did it on purpose,
but I also don't think it occurred to him
to question the implications of making
the dark-skinned races of men side with Sauron.
I'm not saying Tolkien was a bad guy,
I'm just saying he was a man of his time,
and critical race theory didn't really exist yet.
However, it is also important to differentiate between
allegory, story elements that are meant to have
a one-to-one correlation with something outside of the story,
for instance, Aslan in the Narnia books as Christ allegory,
or Animal Farm as allegory for totalitarian communism,
and, of course, there's Mother,
which is the rare modern movie that is just
oops, all allegory.
I gave you everything!
Allegory is not the same as coding,
Why don't you get a haircut with your bitch ass?
which lifts elements from the real world
to provide a shorthand message based on
the presumed worldview of the audience,
i.e., the aliens in Avatar being coded
as indigenous as shorthand for them being
more pure and in touch with nature.
And again, coding is one of those terms
that has become politicized and is often
read as negative when, in fact,
it is a neutral term in academia.
It describes a sociological phenomenon.
Coding is a neutral term.
Allegory exists as a statement of authorial intent.
Coding may or may not even be a conscious choice.
Ah!
With stories made by and for humans,
there is always coding.
There's especially coding in fantasy worlds
derived from the worlds of Tolkien.
Some that were there in the books.
His sense of duty was no less than yours, I deem.
Some that weren't.
And on some levels, this is kind of inescapable
because it's basically impossible to create
fantasy races that aren't at least a little bit
derived from the author's perception of human cultures.
Humans have a natural in-group, out-group mentality
and we've divvied ourselves up
into lots and lots of groups.
So, cultural and racial coding
sneaks into stories, intentional or not.
If we look at Skyrim, for example,
we have the Nords, who are a coded Scandinavian mishmash.
We also have the race of the Khajiit.
Here we have a race of nomadic cat people
with these accents.
Much snow in Skyrim.
Enough snow.
I does not want anymore.
They also make very good thieves.
They like their skooma.
Yeah, yeah, they're Romani.
They're Romani. They're cat Romani. We get it.
You with one of the trade caravans, Khajiit?
Your kind always seems to find trouble.
And then, of course, there are orcs.
Written variations on orcs have been around
in English folklore as far back as Beowulf.
But it was Tolkien who collated the modern idea of the orc.
Tolkien described his orcs as
corruptions of the human form.
Squat, broad, flat-nosed,
sallow-skinned, with wide mouths and slant eyes.
In fact, degraded and repulsive versions
of the, to Europeans,
least lovely Mongol types.
Nice.
The works of Tolkien influenced Dungeons and Dragons,
which influenced Warhammer,
which influenced World of Warcraft,
which influenced the Elder Scrolls games,
which influenced Bright.
Orcs in all of these absorb coding
from ethnic groups from across the world,
from ancient Celts, to Scots,
to the Zulu, and, of course,
the least lovely Mongol types.
So while some fantasy fans want to suggest
that fantasy races sprung fully formed
from the forehead of Zeus with no real-world influences,
Bright isn't completely off the mark
by applying racial coding to its orcs.
And in a perverse way, there is something
cogent about Bright putting its orcs in chains
and sports jerseys and do-rags
and wearing baseball caps with the name
of their gang lovingly embroidered on the front
just like real gangs do.
Ahhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh!
According to Tolkien,
I think that many confuse applicability
with allegory, but the one resides
in the freedom of the reader and the other
in the proposed domination of the author.
In other words, for something to be considered allegorical,
there needs to be authorial intent.
And authors can't really help it if people
read into their work something that they did
not intend.
But coding does not require authorial intent.
Coding is often careless or unintentional,
born from reappropriating tropes
without delving into the history of why they're even there
in the first place.
Missy called John John Binks.
Missy, your humble servant.
Coding in Bright is way too on the nose
to be ignorant, but it certainly
raises questions.
Can racial coding in science fiction
and fantasy used to make some
one-to-one
allegory about interracial
relationships ever actually
work?
One observation that's kind of flown under the radar
is the comparison of Bright to the
almost identical 1988 film Alien
Nation, which has a very similar premise
right down to the first alien
cop in the LAPD, played by
Mandy Patinkin, and the aliens as
thinly veiled allegories for black and hispanic
communities in LA.
Why do we have to take them?
Why can't they go to Russia or someplace like that?
A list of newcomer informants is about
as long as a list of Mexican war
heroes. Hey! Hey! Come on.
Nobody talks to nobody down there.
And half of them don't even speak English.
That movie also sucks. But Alien Nation
has one crucial difference, as does
District 9. The aliens are
relative newcomers to this universe, and
therefore they don't conflict with the rest of history
as we, the audience, knows it.
Now, District 9 is controversial because
it does some of the things that Bright does,
namely using aliens as an allegory for
racial injustice. It's also gotten huge pushback
for its portrayal of the Nigerian gangsters,
and I'm not going to disagree with that.
But while District 9 is far from perfect,
I'm going to quickly point out where I think it succeeds
and its allegory where Bright fails.
1. The aliens are alien, and with the
exception of Christopher Johnson, largely
incomprehensible.
Yes, there is racial coding woven in because
there always is, but they aren't wearing do-rags
and chains and sports jerseys.
God damn it, Bright!
2. Our history and the movie's history diverge like
20 years earlier. The recently divergent
history means that interhuman racism
was allowed to develop and thrive and does not
feel out of place in this universe the way
it does in Bright. 3. You spend a lot of time
with Christopher Johnson and see the actual shit
he and his family live under, and it's not just
stupid lip service like a
kick-me sign at work. 4. District 9 does
not pussyfoot around what it thinks is a cute
metaphor. It does not place the blame of
racism on flawed individuals, but rather
on vast systems in which individuals
are willingly complicit because they
benefit from those systems. But
perhaps the most applicable comparison to Bright
is who framed Roger Rabbit.
What could have possibly happened to you
to turn you into such a sourpuss?
You wanna know?
I'll tell you.
A toon killed my brother.
A toon? No!
First of all, sometimes it is actually better to just not
explain how we got here. Roger Rabbit
never explains the history of how toons came
to be, and to be clear, that is a good
thing, because we do not need it in this
story. It's also a clever reflection on
how black entertainers were valued as commodities
in the 1940s. In
many instances, not even allowed to be
patrons in some establishments in which
they themselves were headliners.
Toon review. Strictly
humans only, okay? But the most
important facet of who framed Roger Rabbit
is that the plot of the corporate scheme to
bulldoze Toontown is perfectly interwoven
with both the themes of the toons as an
exploited underclass and with the protagonist's
own internal conflict and nascent
anti-toon racism. So when you
look at the above examples, especially Roger
Rabbit, the laziness of the world-building
and allegory in Bright comes into sharp
focus. Racism is bad,
orcs are oppressed, now here's a movie
about some cops playing keep-away-with-a-magic-wand
for 90 minutes. Really, a lot of these
problems could have been avoided if they hadn't taken
a poorly thought-out fantasy-based
alternate reality of our own world and used
it to make a comment on the tragedy of modern
racial relations. And the
real irony is if you look at earlier drafts
of the script, they're not really there.
The hacky lines about the Alamo,
words like gangbanger and
homies, those appear to be
Ayer additions. And playing up
those elements only makes the movie make
less sense. Like the master race
of elves here means nothing because the baddies
are outliers. It drops this
very juicy idea that this is a very
vertical society and then does nothing with
it, and it ends up meaning nothing to the world.
More to the point, the plot itself,
keep-the-magic-wand-away-from-Layla,
has fuck-all to do with the
oppression of orcs or Mexicans
or whoever. The entire first act
sets up this world of oppression, but
once the wand comes along, the theme of racism
is bad as just window dressing.
Yeah, the film still would have had racial
coding because all fantasy does,
but did the orcs really need to be wearing
sports jerseys?
Did we need this?
I'm not sure embracing all that
urban gangsta flavor
and leaning in
really, really hard
into that racial coding
while still also keeping
the racism we have
in the real world, like
between humans, was
the right way to go.
So you note in the examples that work,
like District 9 and Who Framed Roger Rabbit,
not only are the actual plots of these movies
about the exploitation of this underclass
and the direct effects of the systemic oppression,
they are actually clever about how oppression
manifests in these alternate universes.
They have their own in-universe
prejudices and stereotypes.
Tomb Raider.
But now he's a sore shot!
Not a lot runs report, cop.
Jirac
was unblooded, like me,
an orc that nobody cared about.
He united the nine armies
and they defeated the Dark Lord.
Wow. That sounds like kind of
a big deal. Like, the kind of big
deal that, I don't know, might lead to
a totally different, intervening
2,000 years of history?
He was a farmer
who changed the world.
According to The World of Bright, there was
a war of nine races 2,000 years ago
where a Dark Lord was bad
and the orcs supported the Dark Lord.
But then there was an unblooded orc named Jirac
who defected from the Dark Lord,
united the nine races, and led to his defeat.
Regardless of the fact that Jirac
was the hero, everyone points to
this little bit of ancient history as the reason
why orcs are discriminated against in the modern day.
You know what they say,
once with the Dark Lord, always with the Dark Lord.
Let's take a quick look at other fantasy stories
that take place in the modern day.
Buffy the Vampire Slayer.
Harry Potter. Underworld.
American Gods. Gargoyles.
All of these have a secret
underworld that exists alongside the world
that we know, and therefore does not contradict it.
This makes Bright unique, but to its detriment.
It never thinks through the implications
of building an alternate history.
Alternate reality stories are relatively
rare compared to secret underworld stories,
but they're not impossible to find.
Bioshock Infinite and Watchmen are popular
alternate reality stories,
but both have relatively recent divergent points
in history, and massively different outcomes.
The point I'm making is that
the 2000 years of backstory all of the characters
make such a huge deal about would have led to
a massively different universe than just
LA with orc homies.
And when people talk about the squandered
potential of Bright, to me this is
the worst part. There is no imagination
put into the history of the world past
the central conceit of a modern setting with
orcs and elves in it. And then when
Ayer rewrote the project, instead of developing
a fully realized world, he had to go ahead
and end up with gritty edginess and
add all that urban gangster flavor.
So you end up with this.
Fairy lives don't matter
today.
So I'm going to ignore
how tone deaf that reference is and just
stick with the inherent implication of the
line. Either Black Lives Matter
exists in the universe, and Ward is
referencing it, or this is
for the benefit of the audience and means to
telegraph that this is a movie about
race. Or it's just a bad ad-lib and
Ayer didn't think through the implication of keeping it in.
Ahem.
Here's a list of things that exist
in the Bright universe.
The Crips. Let's Crip-walk your asses on back
to the barbecue. Shrek.
To take your fat, Shrek-looking
ass. The Alamo.
Hey, don't look at me, man. Mexicans still get shit
for the fucking Alamo. Los Angeles.
Dragons over Los Angeles.
Fairy lives don't matter
today.
Well,
we're gonna go through that point by point.
I'm sorry. I had to.
Bright made me do it.
This fucking movie. Number one, the Crips.
Let's Crip-walk your
asses on back to the barbecue. The history of the Crips
stems from a variety of factors, namely
segregationist housing policies leading up to
World War II and the FBI systemic eradication
of the original Black Panther Party in the late 1960s,
leaving a power vacuum in south-central
LA and a lot of 17-year-olds with
guns. These segregationist housing policies
arose not long after Jim Crow forced many Black
Southerners to immigrate to the west coast in the early
20th century, which directly results
from the diaspora after the Civil War, which
was fought over slavery. Ergo,
it follows that the Atlantic slave
trade existed in the Bright
Universe. Number two, Shrek
exists. To take your fat,
Shrek-looking ass back
to your vehicle and drive the fuck home
to Fiona. Meaning that Jeffrey Katzenberg
exists, and the Disney Company
exists, and it made its bread and butter from
fairy tales, which are just normal tales
in this universe, but okay. Meaning
that Jeffrey Katzenberg was let go from the Disney Company
after 15 years and an acrimonious
multi-million dollar settlement and several lawsuits,
and after several failed attempts at 2D animation,
Dreamworks broke through with its pastiche and version
of fairy tale tropes, Shrek.
The Alamo exists.
Hey, don't look at me, man. Mexicans
still get shit for the fucking Alamo.
Were there orcs there, too?
If there's so much strike between non-human
races, why is there inter-human
racism? Was there chattel slavery of orcs
in addition to black people, and that's why
orcs seem to all have European
white surnames? Was the
Alamo a bigger deal in this universe?
Because Mexican-Americans get shit for a lot of
things. I thought you were out having your, like,
zillionth baby. The Alamo is not
one of those things. What was
the nine races? Were Mexicans
one of the nine races? I see you.
I see you typing those comments about
how I'm overthinking this, and you know,
yeah, it's true, but why are you watching this channel anyway?
But, you know, I can't
help it, and people say
that they're interested in the world-building
of Bright, and I'm like,
there isn't any. It's just
Star World with some
fantasy stuff slapped on top.
Los Angeles exists, meaning a Franciscan
mission settlement was built in the 18th century, meaning
the Catholic Church maintained its dominion over Spain,
meaning the War of Nine Races, a thing that is so
big a deal that in 2,000 years after the fact,
it warrants graffiti, was not such a big deal
that Emperor Constantine couldn't make
Christianity the official religion of the Roman Empire
in the 4th century AD.
You cannot include elements
from our real world without importing
the history that comes with them.
I mean, you can, it's just,
you know, it's lazy and it sucks.
This is why modern sci-fi and fantasy
with alternate histories are so rare,
and the ones you do see, like The Man
in the High Castle and Bioshock Infinite,
have relatively recent divergent points
in history. Sure, you could give us an
alternate fantasy past that resulted in a
similar present with cars and stuff,
but the histories can't be the same.
L.A. wouldn't exist, Shrek wouldn't
exist, the crypts wouldn't exist,
it doesn't make sense for there to be racism
against Mexicans or black
people if we're so
bigoted against orcs.
Everywhere I go, live orcs always
gotta be the bad guys.
And elves.
So instead of an organic
world where the history is woven in,
it's just our world with fantasy elements
slapped on top, like magnets
on a fridge.
I know, building an alternate history
and weaving it in would have been difficult.
So they just didn't bother, and
it's just lazy, and it sucks.
We will not be listening to no orcish music.
The whole root of this entire
monstrosity of a video,
of me complaining about Brite
for 45 minutes, which you have
now sat through, good for you, thanks
for that, is because
I could not stop thinking about
this one line
from Sheriff's Deputy
Rodriguez.
No, Rodriguez, they don't.
And it's played as a joke, like we the audience
are supposed to get and understand it.
Like, yes, ha ha ha, we do
give Mexicans shit for the Alamo.
I personally told my neighbor Jorge
to remember it just the other day.
But it reveals both the ignorance and the
incuriosity of the filmmakers.
It understands that movies about racism
win awards,
but has no curiosity to its causes
or its roots. So by reducing
bigotry to single, definable, and justifiable
historical events, like a lot of
the fantasy genre does with its worldbuilding,
reducing bigotry to single,
justifiable, and even understandable conflicts
makes racism feel that much
more reasonable. Logical, even.
Mexicans get shit because of the Alamo.
Orcs get shit because of the
Dark Lord. Racism is bad,
but, you know,
people have legit reasons for being racist.
Like black men
consciously playing into stereotypes.
And the Alamo.
This is a massive shortcoming of movies like
Crash and Brite.
They seek to understand the logic behind
racism, but racism isn't
logical. And you can't logic people
out of a mindset they did not logic
themselves into. Chance the Rapper
commented in a tweet after watching Brite,
I always feel a little cheated when I see allegorical
racism in movies, because that racism usually
stems from human emotion or tolerance,
but not by law or systems the way it is
in real life. The world of this movie
reaches for edgy and topical, but is just lazy
and careless. All it wants is to
import the facade of urban, gangsta
flavor. And the language of bigotry
in these movies is so cartoonish that no
one would see it in themselves.
Dwarfs have mad hops.
This is a popular go-to when trying to capture the
language of casual racism in movies.
The focus on historical events.
The army of nine races fought shoulder
to shoulder to give you the world
you neglect. The focus on affirmative
action. And what happens if they hire more
of them? I can't look at you without thinking
about the five or six more qualified white
men who didn't get your job. What the fuck about
my demeanor gives you the impression
that I want to be a target on the department's
work diversity radar. Yes, white bitterness
about affirmative action and corporate diversity
initiatives is certainly a thing.
But this captures that bitterness poorly because
if you use the actual language of casual racism
you run the risk of offending casual racists
which is a huge demographic.
Tonight's the trifecta. Is that your cousin?
Full moon. Friday night.
Summer heat wave.
So you use the language of cartoon
casual racism and never have to run the risk
of making the audience question whether they are
seeing themselves in the bad guys.
How many orcs play pro basketball?
None. They're slow. They're heavy.
That's why half the NFL defensive lines
are orcish. It's not racism. It's physics.
Reduce the outcome of racism
to a kick me sign and justify
racism and bigotry by pointing to historical
events where entire ethnic groups made
an oopsie daisy. Hey, don't look at me, man.
Mexicans still get shit for the fucking Alamo.
Fantasy world building is always going to be a
reflection of the author's experiences
and you will have blind spots or biases that
will manifest themselves in the work.
The problem isn't just that this world is too close to
our own, so inevitably you can't help but
impose our world logic onto it.
It isn't just that being on the nose with your race
allegory might read as tone deaf.
Fairy lives don't matter today.
And it isn't just that fairy lives don't
matter. Really, it's just
that it's incurious and lazy
but it doesn't want to be.
And that is what makes it disappointing.
Remember when music
sold so well that people would use
it to promote movies? Yes, they do.
Yeah. We're going to make this a franchise.
Okay. We're going to
have a knockoff animated TV show.
It's going to be on Fox on Saturday mornings.
Saturday morning cartoons.
That's still a thing, right?
No.
Yeah.
