Welcome to the fourth annual Golden Crocoduck Award.
Thank you, thank you ladies and gentlemen. Oh, you're too kind. And my thanks to St Jude
Thaddeus, the patron saint of lost causes, for hosting this glittering event.
Well it's been an exciting day. All the stars have been gathering for the award ceremony
here at St Jude's Theatre. There's the Pope arriving, sharing an intimate moment with
St Jude himself. And could it be? Yes, even Kent Hogan has arrived to watch the show,
of course coming in the back way. As you know, his son is one of the contenders for a coveted
Golden Crocoduck this year, awarded for the biggest breach of the ninth commandment in
pursuit of the creationist cause. And they're all in for a real treat, because it's been
an exciting and closely fought contest this year. There was a lively debate on the voting
video forum, and as voting proceeded, it soon became clear that we had no obvious front
runner. Two of the contestants were running neck and neck. So let's announce the results
in time-honoured Golden Crocoduck tradition by starting from the back of the field.
Yes, we now come to the top two. As I said, the number of votes they were receiving throughout
the count were very close. It was a kind of Dewey vs Truman moment, because I started
to prepare videos on both of them. And the final vote tally was a nail-biting 1,278 votes
against 1,209. So who had the highest score? Well, let's introduce him with his own immortal
catchphrase. I should have listened to my daily.
Yes, Eric Hovind, the rascal, showed that he's a chip off the old block and just managed
to squeeze ahead of Ian Juby to win this year's coveted Golden Crocoduck, five years after
his dad won the very same award. So let's look back at Eric's spectacular rise to fame.
Even as a youth, Eric featured in his dad's seminars and speeches.
We live in Pensacola, Florida. Been there for 15 years. I have three kids, one of each.
And when Hovind Sr was locked up in the Pensacola penitentiary for cheating on his taxes, young
Eric took to introducing his videos. Why are we here? Where do we come from, for
that matter? Where are we going to go when this life is over? I don't know. In this seminar
that talks about the age of the Earth, Dr Hovind gives solid evidence to show that this
Earth is not billions of years old. And it wasn't too much of a step to then blow the
dust off Dad's old scripts and make a living out of reading them aloud.
We still see spiral arms on our galaxies indicating they are less than billions of years old.
What about in here for billions of years, there should be lots of supernovas out there.
You can't consistently lose heat until eventually you get cold. But Jupiter is still very hot.
Well, how could it be losing heat for billions of years and still be...
Now Eric seems to pop up everywhere, from his Christian Science Evangelism videos to
chat shows with Ray Comfort. And because of this, we're beginning to get a much clearer
and rather disturbing picture of him. So if you're taught that you're nothing but
an animal and that you're nothing but something that has no morals, there are no moral absolutes,
you're going to behave that way. Sex outside of marriage, who cares? Lying, stealing,
who cares? It wouldn't matter. I had an AWS on the fundamentally flawed podcast with a
couple of atheists and they asked me, they said, Eric, if you were not a Christian, would
that, would that let you just do anything you want to do? I said, absolutely. I would
live my life with absolutely no restraints at all. I would do whatever I want.
You would? Boy, I hate to say it, Eric, but if that's the case, then your morals are worse
than any atheist I know. After all, most Christians don't become cheats, liars and thieves when
they lose their faith. I certainly didn't. And most of the people in France or Japan
or Sweden don't seem to need Jesus in order to lead honest and decent lives.
Yes, we do do what we feel like and what makes us happy, but as long as it doesn't harm or
inconvenience anyone, if you had a frustrating and sexless youth, that's too bad, but don't
expect the rest of us to follow suit. Because for us, sex between two consenting adults
prior to marriage is perfectly okay. But stealing someone's wallet or cheating on taxes, well
of course that's not okay because that does hurt or inconvenience other people. If billions
of law abiding people can refrain from cheating and stealing without the threat of hell and
damnation, then surely, Eric, you can do it too. If you can't, then I'd respectfully suggest
that there might be something worryingly wrong with your basic upbringing and character.
And that's where we get lots of... you guys get lots of testimonies.
I'd be in jail if I wasn't a Christian.
Oh, awkward moment. Bit of a low blow, Ray. Thank goodness Eric follows Jesus and doesn't
behave like an animal, sort of. Since that vicious attack, the left comfort unable to
perform marital duties, Eric has continued preaching his dad's peculiar version of science
to the creationist masses. And Eric was even able to call in an expert witness.
We got to come out here to California and I'm having the pleasure of sitting down with
a geophysicist that unfortunately has to remain anonymous. So, can I call you Steve?
My name is Gladys.
Alright, so Steve is going to share with us... now, just Steve, let me ask you as a geophysicist
that works in the profession out there, actually doing the work of a geologist and things like
that, what... are you really concerned about people knowing your identity because it will
affect your job? Absolutely.
Actually, the pixelated geophysicist did make one interesting point. Eric Hovind, you may
remember, was first nominated for a Golden Crocoduck for this absurd suggestion.
The Colorado River exits the canyon 1800 feet above sea level. It enters the canyon 2800
feet above sea level. And the top of Grand Canyon is 7000 feet above sea level. So you
tell me, did the river flow uphill for millions of years to carve out the Grand Canyon?
And as I explained, rivers don't flow uphill. What happened was that the Colorado Plateau
was uplifted and then eroded by the Colorado River that sat on top of it. Uplift and erosion
are the two most basic principles of geology. Well, it seems Eric took this on board.
Whenever I presented the whole idea of the Kaibab uplift and how it had to be cut through
a breach dam, the offence, the evolution aside is no, the ground rose up while the
river continued to carve for millions of years and they say all that layer you can trace
and you can see that it has risen up that high over the last several million years.
Any evidence to that? Has it risen up? Yeah. I suppose it has. It's higher. I think that's
kind of a no brainer.
So there you have it, Eric. Even your own pixelated geophysicist tells you the Colorado
River never flowed uphill. He agrees the plateau was uplifted, just as I said. So Eric,
you've learned something. And as Dave Barry would say, we've learned something too. The
pixelated geophysicist would be a great name for a rock band.
I love it that here we have a geologist that is a professional that says, yeah, the evidence
fits is consistent with the biblical world view.
Don't miss the rest of this Creation Science Evangelism series.
Eric Hovind interviews a biologist.
Eric Hovind interviews a cosmologist.
Eric Hovind interviews a chemist whose nose has been replaced by a penis.
After years of plugging away at science and presenting this solid evidence of a young
Earth to creationist audiences, Eric finally got the chance to present his solid scientific
evidence to a couple of real scientists at the Reason rally in Washington, Thunderf00t
and Aaron Ra. Now was his chance to confound them with how galaxies should have spun out
and how the recession of the Moon proves a young Earth. So what would be his first question
to stump them? How can we find blood cells in dinosaur bones or trees growing through
millions of years of sediment? Nope, his first question was this.
Is it impossible for God to exist?
Hang on, Eric, every time you talk to creationists you bring up your solid scientific evidence.
Solid evidence to show that this Earth is not billions of years old.
After all, your organisation is called Creation Science Evangelism. But when you get the chance
to show real scientists what they got wrong and stump them with your solid evidence, you
chicken out. You ask a vague, banal and unanswerable question that pertains to philosophy rather
than science.
The question is malformed.
Is it impossible, is it an absolute impossibility for God to exist?
Of course it's a malformed question on many levels. My problem with the question, and
I get asked it a lot, is that Hovind hasn't defined what this God thing is. In another
debate he defined it as this.
Here's the definition again. God is a spirit, infinite, eternal and unchanging in his being,
wisdom, power, holiness, justice, goodness and truth. So my definition of God is right
there and that's what I'll be wanting to talk about as far as we talk to you guys.
He's a spirit. So that's kind of a simple definition of what is God. So is it impossible
that a spirit exists that has all knowledge, all power, he's infinite, eternal, unchanging,
is that an impossibility that that exists?
But of course that's not a definition of what Eric believes the God is. This description
is so vague it covers just about every God in every religion ever invented. Some people
define this spirit as the God of Jewish tradition who made the universe 6,500 years ago and
came to earth in human form or made Mohammed his prophet. Others think the God made the
universe 13.7 billion years ago and controlled its development. Some think this God made
all the animals and plants instantaneously, others think it directed evolution, others
think it created life and let evolution unfold on its own. So in the interest of clarity,
Eric, did your particular God make all the animals and planets and stars and galaxies
in a single week about 6,500 years ago? The answer is yes, thank you. And did it flood
the entire world 4,000 years ago? Yes again. So if that's your definition of God then
the answer to your question is yes, it is impossible for this God to exist because we
know that these feats attributed to it either didn't happen or didn't happen in the time
scale you claim. We know this through observable geological, cosmological, physical, chemical
and biological evidence. Now if you want to dispute that, that's where we can discuss
the geological, cosmological, physical, chemical and biological evidence that you claim supports
the creation of everything 6,500 years ago and the flooding of the world 4,000 years
ago. Since you've gone out of your way to avoid having that discussion, I suspect you
know that your evidence isn't that solid and is only suitable for gullible creationist
audiences rather than knowledgeable scientists. The encounter with Thunderf00t culminated
in this rather poignant question. Are they actually, if they believe in God, are they
brain cells? Do they know that? How do you know that you are one of these people? You
heard right, Eric Fitts his own characterisation of someone in a psych ward. A lot of people
in psych wards, Eric agrees, believe they have a revelation from an invisible being,
whether it's Jesus, an alien from another planet or a pink rabbit. But the reason Eric
doesn't think he belongs in a psych ward is because he has a revelation from an invisible
being. So is he dangerous and insane? No, I think Eric's just safely delusional. The
reason he thinks he'd be dangerous without Jesus, despite the walking evidence of billions
of nice honest people who don't have a messiah, is because that's what he was told day in,
day out, every day of his childhood. Make kids believe this year after year and eventually
they won't be able to unbelieve it. Without Jesus, you can't function as a decent human
being. If you don't believe in God, you'll burn in hell forever. If his parents had been
equally devout Muslims, you'd see Eric with a beard on YouTube slamming Christian blasphemers.
If his parents had been members of the Phelps family, he'd be holding up a God hates fags
sign at the funerals of American soldiers. Eric is the perfect example of how easy it
is to mould children into believing whatever the parents believe, as long as you shut them
off from outside influences during their formative years and scare them enough. But that's no
excuse for making speeches and videos designed to mislead people about science, which makes
Eric a deserving winner for the 2012 Golden Crocoduck. So as the litter is swept away
from the St Jude Thaddeus Theatre and the last molested boy limps home from the Catholic
after party, it's time to bid farewell to this year's Golden Crocoduck. Congratulations
Eric, the award is in the mail. And that's as true as the uphill climb of the Colorado
River.
