Are you having trouble attracting a mate?
Is no one responding to your dick pics despite listing
The Shawshank Redemption and The Big Lebowski as your favorite movies on your profile?
Do you, for some reason, invest way more value in sex than in genuine happiness or fulfilling relationships?
Hmm, yes, well, just one more question and then I can get you the help you need.
Do you have any disposable income?
["Dance of the Sugar Plum Fairy"]
Pickup artistry, or PUA, or as they call it, GAME,
refers to the apparently lost, secret technique of convincing people that sleeping with you is a good idea.
["How do you ask for a date?"
Wikipedia politely calls them the
"...seduction community."
Ugh.
While the concept has been around since the 70s, the
"...community really got going in the Internet age.
On places like Usenet and later Reddit,
people who sit inside all day arguing with other men on the Internet
can take the time to trade tips on how they think women work.
And some people rose to the top to make careers from their writing
through ad-supported websites or self-published books on Amazon.
One such fellow, arguably the most popular, is
Dariush Felizadeh,
who calls himself Roush V because he knows most of his readership has trouble spelling and pronouncing difficult words.
He's written a whole bunch of books on pickup artistry and how to do it in various specific countries,
which you can buy on Amazon or his shady-ass Web 2.0-looking website.
You know, if there's one thing I just love doing,
it's paying other men to tell me what they think women think about stuff.
That's way more mature than asking them.
Let's read some of his breakout book!
Bang!
Shall we?
Why am I putting it in my mouth? That's stupid.
Never tell a girl that she's beautiful or hot,
because what that does is increase her value relative to yours.
Not complimenting will help you,
because you're withholding a reward that all women want,
one that they will stick around waiting for.
Do not discuss your feelings of emotion or attraction for her.
Never tell a girl you like her or feel something for her.
Only in movies will discussing your feelings ever get
THE DESIRABLE FEMALE.
We use indirect game without compliments,
where she's never completely sure about her feelings for her.
You're not hiding anything.
You're just being mysterious.
I am Roush V, lord of mysteries.
It is an act whereby a man inserts a rod-shaped mass of tissue
into a woman's lubricated cavity, also made of tissue.
Don't be too concerned with sexual technique.
Porn is my teacher.
A man rubs his rod in and out,
stimulating pleasure receptors until his brain decides on the right time
to eject a genetic package.
Since sex is supposed to be fun,
don't take it too seriously by questioning whether you're doing things right.
Worrying about her pleasure sacrifices your own.
Pump slowly, getting slightly farther in with each pump until...
HE LAUGHS
Congratulate yourself on the notch.
HE CHUCKLES
That's gross.
Oh, it's getting hot and sexy in here, isn't it?
Coming down with a case of the fucking vapors!
Now, I could go into detail about every single strategy in this book
and how it reveals a deeply unsettling inability to empathize with women as human beings
and how most of it doesn't actually work.
In fact, that's why this video took so long to make.
Initially, it was gonna be about every single thing in the book,
but what I actually find is really funny
is that Roush agrees with me about how poorly it works.
The most telling piece of advice in the book is actually its simplest.
Be prepared for a lot of disappointment.
Most phone numbers will go nowhere.
You're doing incredible if half the numbers you get result in a first date.
Even when your game gets really good,
you will still get rejected and have prospects that don't convert.
On your 100th approach, there will be the experience of 99 previous approaches at your back
helping you succeed.
This is why it is better to be the man that tries and fails
than one who does not try at all.
Now, on a certain level, yeah, dating is easier for you
because of how you approach it if you accept that not everyone will accept you
and no set of tactics will work on 100% of women.
But combined with the rest of this fucking shitty nonsense advice,
it's an admission of failure.
If I wrote a guide on how to succeed at Dota
and the first chapter started with,
get used to disappointment, following these tips you'll only actually win
one in a hundred times,
you'd want your fucking money back, wouldn't you?
This puts something of a dent in the idea that pickup artistry actually works, doesn't it?
It only looks like it works because it tells you to try it hundreds of times,
so people who are utterly committed to it will probably eventually see some results.
Does that actually mean it works, though?
I know I'm arguing semantics here, but if you roll six dice hundreds of times,
you'll eventually land all sixes,
but that doesn't mean I've taught you how to be a dice roll artist, does it?
It just goes on like that.
Honestly, I've read as many of the books that I could get a hold of
for less than asking price,
and they're basically the same book over and over again.
But I gotta give Roosh some credit, though.
First of all, he sold the same book in, like, 15 different forms to the same people,
but he's also very good at constructing sentences
that sound deep and introspective and original,
but if you think about them for more than, like, 1.2 seconds,
you realize that they're nonsense.
They're actually less than nothing sometimes.
Take, for example, this section from Bang Ukraine.
Ukraine is what I call a paint-over culture.
Ukrainians don't try to fix problems, they paint over them instead.
The women do this with their excessive use of makeup,
fake eyebrows, and fake eyelashes.
A fat Ukrainian man who looks like Jabba the Hutt
will paint over himself with a Mercedes-Benz.
Ukrainians look for quick fixes and shortcuts
to give them the appearance of beauty or success.
Roosh has invented an entirely new sociological term
to describe the new phenomenon of women wearing fake eyelashes
and men compensating for things by buying nice cars.
Only in Ukraine, am I right?
Roosh's books are full of Barnum statements like this,
where he pretends he's come up with something unique to that culture
when, in fact, he's saying the same thing again,
but he's come up with a different pithy way of saying it.
He's basically writing horoscopes, but for desperate and lonely people.
He's basically writing horoscopes.
And if you're not the biggest fan of reading books,
Roosh has also brought his masterful understanding of sociology to YouTube,
where you can find him explaining how to approach women in bars...
using...
What you gotta do, it doesn't get easier than this.
Just stand next to the girl that you want to talk to,
wait until she gets... she gets her drink,
then tap her on the shoulder with your hand three times
after the transaction is complete,
and then deliver your opening line.
I have to... I...
Look, I wanted this video to feature some of Roosh's best arguments
so I could actually debunk them and explain why the ideas were wrong,
but...
this is a video of a 37-year-old man
using Lego to explain how to approach women.
It debunks itself.
Through words, it's hard to explain,
so what I did is I went to the toy store and I bought some dolls.
I... I'm out of a fucking job now.
These people are too stupid to even bother ridiculing.
I'm done. I quit. See ya.
Ah, fuck it. Ah, fine, fine, whatever.
He might be easy prey,
but let's at least make fun of his audience and website while we're at it.
Why not?
In addition to creating Return of Kings,
a website which oscillates between advice for picking up sluts
and getting angry that people settle for used women...
I'm beginning to think that these guys have an internally contradicting ideology,
but that might just be me.
He also runs Rouge V Forum, a small personal army of customer...
sorry, definite real friends he likes
that at one point he tried to get to assemble
in various locations throughout the world
for some kind of mass demonstration.
He is prominent and, I'm gonna be honest,
just better YouTuber Dan Olson
with a story about one of the meetups he infiltrated.
Okay, so back in January 2016,
confessed rapist Rouge V starts planning
this global semi-simultaneous meetup of fans
to, like, discuss what it means to be their myopic,
atrophied idea of a real man
and generally just, you know, complain about women.
Now, they do most of this planning just in public forums,
which, you know, usually for a meetup is fine.
No one cares about your little fan club meeting.
Unless you're a rapist who runs a rape blog
that teaches other men how to rape,
in which case you're probably gonna get some pushback.
So things get kinda heated.
Mostly on social media,
and Rouge goes and locks down his forum
and starts changing all of the plans,
and it just gets gonzo so fast.
Like, not just,
hey, take it to a private conversation.
They start immediately building, like,
three, four layers of bad spy thriller nonsense
into the whole thing.
Now, I'd already had an undercover account
on his forums for a while,
so I can just see all of this.
And the local meetup,
they wanted me to prove my loyalty
before they told me the meetup location
by sending a screencap of an Amazon receipt
for one of Rouge's books.
Okay.
So the next stage is
everyone's going to meet up at one location at 7.30,
then move to the actual location at 7.40.
So there's only a 10-minute window
to actually, like, meet up with the rest of the people.
And now, how do you know you're meeting the right people?
Well, you walk up to them,
and the code phrase,
the code phrase you ask them is,
is this the place?
And the countersign is,
yes, but only because of the cancellation.
Quote, any other answer or hesitation,
and you'll know they're just a bystander.
Oh, they also reminded everyone
that you probably shouldn't bring any weapons to this event,
that they're totally insisting
it's just some dudes getting together
to be dudes together.
So anyway, I jump through all of these hoops.
The evening comes.
I go to the first meeting spot,
and now, this is early February in Calgary at night.
It is so cold out.
But any which way,
I hang around for a good 20, almost 30 minutes,
and no one asks me if this is the place.
No one else shows up.
No one else lurks around
like they're too shy to ask complete strangers
some code word.
Nothing.
So I check my email real quick,
just to be sure,
and there's this whole string of emails
that had come while I was traveling there and waiting.
So all these last-minute emails
where people are like,
Hey guys, it's really cold out,
and I'm tired from work,
so have fun without me.
So that's it.
I'm the entire meetup
for the Calgary chapter of Return of Kings.
The Calgary chapter of Return of Kings
has a 100% SJW saturation rate.
It is intensely compromised.
And as the reigning king of that meetup,
I decide, you know what?
Let's move this totally-not-betacuck meeting
to Fatburger.
So I went to Fatburger,
and it was delicious.
His books also contain a shit ton of alpha-praising nonsense.
You know, the stuff based on a debunked study
we covered in the Golden One video?
Beta males have a serious problem
with telling their lady friends
that they like them.
Pick-up artistry and alpha-masculinity-praising ideology
don't so much go hand-in-hand
as they're the same two hands shaking each other
belonging to the same man
because they're the same.
I'm yet to find someone who thinks pick-up artistry is great
but doesn't praise all the other ridiculous bullshit.
These things kind of have to go together.
Heck, the Golden One has plenty of videos about dating.
In fact, that's what gave me the idea to do this one.
Remember this part of the video?
If I ever need any dating advice,
and what are the odds of that,
I'll look you up.
Yeah, well, uh,
that was a setup for this video.
Welcome to the Hbomberguy Expanded Universe.
It's a book that triumphs being an alpha
with phrases like,
the alpha male does not care about what other people think of him,
written in a book which dedicates over 100 pages
to trying to make yourself look better than you actually are
so people will think more highly of you,
which it also admits doesn't work most of the time.
In a frankly stunning display of a monumental lack of self-awareness,
when describing what he feels as important alpha traits,
he writes,
The alpha male lives in his own reality.
Criticizing this behavior will probably net the criticism
from true believers that I'm some kind of baiter
who can't understand it or is too afraid of their desires
and the deep truths contained within this twerpish prose.
But ironically, I actually don't care what idiots think.
I'm the real alpha, basically.
It's me. I'm the good guy now. It's me.
Roosh has even invented his own particular version
of fake masculinity-praising ideology,
calling it neo-masculinity.
He prides it as a stunning return to the ancient periods
when men were real men like in these statues,
but because he hasn't read what those times were actually like
because he was too busy writing Barnum statements about Ukraine,
spoilers, they were really gay,
a thing neo-masculinity explicitly rejects,
he's really preaching a return to an imaginary time period
he made up in his mind.
In reality, idolizing a non-existent prelapsarian point in history
is like wanting to return to the Garden of Eden or the womb.
It's a pathology for only the saddest.
Okay, I wanted to do a thing where I remade one of Roosh's videos
with Lego and then made fun of it,
but this was literally all the Lego I could find.
This lady with the parish shirt and this beauty salon,
and there's like a giant toy lion that I still have for some reason,
but I threw out all my Legos when I became an adult,
so I can't really do this bit.
In a BBC3 documentary, Reggie Yates goes to one of Roosh's talks,
and in a small enclosed room,
Roosh outlines not the reasons why his philosophy works
and spreading tips for male self-improvement
or even more tips on how to pick up women.
Instead, we're treated to what I like to call
Offerings not of reasons why his way works or is successful,
but excuses for why it isn't.
Women are no longer trained to submit to a man, to serve a man.
Women are being applauded and encouraged
to look like fat, outer space cyborgs.
Women and gays are seen as superior to straight men.
Anything that a woman or a gay person wants is theirs,
but anything you want, sorry, we cannot help you.
Mainstream feminism is trying to destroy him.
Straight male people aren't being served
and aren't allowed to have their desires anymore.
The media lies and so on.
Social justice warriors and the feminists that are aligned with them
are like a virus.
They try to infect every platform, every group, every topic,
every niche to silence any kind of thought that they don't like.
We recently saw this with GamerGate.
The bedrock of this school of thought is fundamentally broken.
It's a worldview designed not to explain how to be a winner,
but to explain why you're a loser.
And don't worry, it's not because your ideas don't work.
It's not because you have a reductive view of women
and actively pursue not understanding them.
It's because women are too powerful.
And here, in this tiny basement,
we're gonna put them to rights by you paying me
to tell you you were right all along.
I'm sorry, but I'm gonna have to put Roosh's version of pick-up artistry
in the maybe pile for now.
So, who's next?
Well, there's Matt Forney of mattforney.com,
whose avatar looks as little like Matt Forney as it could possibly be.
I'm seeing a happy, jovial fellow with perfectly sculpted facial hair.
You might want to get your money back from whoever you hired, mate.
They really didn't capture the bewildered sadness very well.
Much like Roosh, in fact, almost as if he's trying to be Roosh.
He has his own website with his articles
and another really crappy-looking place where he sells his books.
But at least for him, pick-up artistry is just a side gig.
He just sells DO THE PHILIPPINES,
a title weirdly close in name to Roosh's books.
That's an odd similarity.
Wait. Hang on.
Almost the entire ad copy is borrowed in style and substance from Roosh's books.
Even the risk-free thing is simi...
This whole thing's a racket, isn't it?
They're just ripping off each other at this point.
I don't know about you, but I expected much more integrity and intellectual rigor
from the seduction community.
So it's like a game. You guys are writing the same thing.
Oh, look, and he got a bunch of totally-not-his-friends
to write recommendations for the book.
It's clear to me, reading this book,
that Matt Forney fell in love with the Philippines and her women
and that he wishes they find love with men who will love them.
Yeah, there must be a lot of love in Matt Forney's heart
for women, for them to find love,
and also a love for the financial success of Roosh's books.
To exacerbate that sense of love
that Matt Forney simply excretes from every orifice like a sexy puss,
let's read from one of his advice articles,
entitled,
How to Crush a Girl's Self-Esteem.
Can you feel the fucking love yet?!
Merely banging a girl isn't enough for a man.
He needs to possess her very being to be satisfied.
It's a policy.
Any ladies out there want to have their very beings possessed?
One, constantly make her feel inadequate.
You should rarely give her unqualified praise.
Every time she does something for you,
find out what she did wrong and remind her of it.
If you can't find any problems, make some up.
Nothing she does can ever be good enough for you.
I felt slimy saying that one.
This is how you can crush her self-image and own her mind, body, and soul.
Oh my God, what a wonderfully positive article.
Matt finally admits women have souls.
Matt then goes on to describe a situation in which
being a bad boyfriend and insulting his girlfriend
stopped her from eating what she wanted at lunch.
Matt is currently single.
Somehow, I'm sure it's feminism's fault.
Oh, another article of his.
No head, please. I'm female.
Oh, boy.
Whenever my husband goes down on me,
I just get frustrated and I end up asking him to stop.
It took me ages to figure out what was wrong.
Cunnilingus is unnatural for women.
It seems that Matt briefly operated a website
called Virginia's Secret Garden,
a website where he pretended to be his ideal woman,
a submissive Christian housewife living in the Midwest.
Not only that, I've come to believe that going down on a girl
upsets the natural order of masculine dominance.
When a man goes down on a woman, the dynamic is flipped.
He's a submissive one and you're the one he's desperate to please.
It's a complete perversion of the natural order.
Using his personal fan fiction as a mouthpiece,
Matt claims that Cunnilingus is unnatural because he,
by which I mean made-up person Virginia Robinson,
doesn't enjoy it.
As much as a man as my husband is,
I can't respect him when he's dragging his tongue
across my nether regions.
Women aren't going to respect you less
if you go down on them, Matt.
It's impossible for women to have any less respect for you
than they already do.
I'm going to say it again
to let it sink in.
Matt Forney is so scared of
or mad about oral sex
that he invented a fake woman
to tell him it's okay
and that she never liked it anyway.
That sounds like a compelling argument.
Which brings us to the oddest thing
about the séduction communautaire,
that even the sex isn't fun for anyone involved
once they get around to it.
You have Rouche desperately trying to come up
with a reason to want to have sex,
struggling to describe it
in a way that actually sounds fun,
insisting that you just shouldn't worry about technique.
It's just a rod of tissue.
You have the Golden One calling it
a not-especially-pleasing activity
and just a transaction of power.
You have Matt Forney inventing fake women
to explain that sex wasn't supposed to be fun.
And you have this red-pill philosophy bloke,
fellow YouTuber ContraPoints,
pointed out in one of his videos,
to be utterly disgusted by sex as a concept.
"'Cause at the end of the day,
sex, you're gonna be impaling her
with your ugly, engorged penis.
There's nothing pretty about that.
No pretty boy, okay?"
I have a question.
If pleasure doesn't matter
and the person you're sleeping with doesn't matter to you
because you've pursued a worldview
based around thinking so little of them,
what's the fucking point?
The most damning thing about pickup artistry
is that it doesn't work even when it works
Nothing she does can ever be good enough for you.
Roosh claims that his techniques work,
but there is something of a conflict of interest, isn't there?
He's literally trying to sell you books
about the techniques.
Of course he'd say it works,
but assuming that he's not a lying conman
who wants your money,
is it actually making him happy?
I don't think it is.
Pickup artistry is a lifestyle in which you pursue
a happiness that you never arrive at
and hopefully make a little money on the way
conning other people into paying you for your tips
you probably copied from Roosh,
you plagiarist piece of shit!
The Prologue of Bang is a story about how hurt Roosh felt
when he discovered a girl he thought liked him
was dating someone else.
We would study together in groups and I could swear
she was giving me extra attention.
I analysed the situation with my nice guy friends
and we all concluded that she did like me
as more than a friend.
After a couple of weeks of hesitation,
I finally asked her out on a casual date to the movies.
She said she couldn't because she was very busy.
Weeks later, I'd see her on campus
holding hands with another guy.
Instead of listening to the lame
love songs like I usually did
for the first time I got angry.
A lifetime of frustration and not getting what I wanted
became focused on this one girl.
I was bitter that I, a nice guy,
was getting passed over for guys who I thought were losers.
If I did end up talking to her,
I would cut our conversation short.
When she would ask me to study, I'd lie
and say I was studying alone,
only for her to find my study group late at night in the library.
I started feeling good for treating her poorly.
I hated her and everything that she stood for,
which was my failure amidst women.
Roosh then details that
after doing this, he discovered she was
trying harder to be his friend.
He puts this down to girls secretly wanting bad boys
when an outside observer can see
it might be because she really did like him as a friend
and tried to continue it
even though she had a boyfriend.
The story then abruptly cuts off and goes into
a more general story about the power of being
mad at women. Presumably this is because
not only did this behavior never get him
the girl, but she probably
eventually gave up on their friendship and moved on
with her life, and he doesn't want to
mention that bit. His very first
story about the success of his techniques
is a story about a friend
he pushed away because he was disappointed
he didn't get to fuck her.
He insists he used to be the stereotypical
nice guy, but it sounds like
he never really had any respect
for that person in the first place.
Pick-up artists call it game, and the name
comes from a particular non-fiction book called
The Game, penetrating the secret
society of pick-up artists. Oh, do you get it?
The author, journalist Neil Strauss,
initially saw success and
gained friendships with other sad little
boy men who idolize having the power to do
something they don't really like with women they don't
enjoy being with, and all of them
had cute little assumed names like
Mystery, Style,
Herbal, Playboy,
and of course Tyler Durden
because why wouldn't these people
identify as the deranged manifestation
of masculinity-worshipping ideology?
Spoilers, eventually Strauss'
relationships with the friends he made collapsed.
It turns out these people are emotionally
unstable. Who'd have thought?
And then he concludes that pick-up artistry is for
losers and attempts to rebuild his life.
I felt a little bad outright dismissing
this stuff as for losers just before,
but here's Neil Strauss,
the most prominent figure
to ever emerge from the
seduction community, saying it
himself. Ten years after
publishing The Game, Strauss put out a
book called The Truth, an uncomfortable
book about relationships.
Its provisional title was Game Over, or
as I like to call it, The Game Part Two
Guess What? Still Depressed.
The Truth is the opposite of The Game
in every way, even down to its
cover. It details Strauss trying to
put his life back together and have an actual rewarding
long-term relationship with another human
being. The guy's attempts to emotionally
recover and see people as people are
kind of commendable, and I hope the people
who desperately follow his earlier advice
also eventually experience the same
development. It would be nice if these
sad people stopped ruining their lives
and maybe helped others do the same,
but that might mean giving up on their
source of income, and in this economy,
pfft!
Thank you all very much for watching,
and also for being so patient with me.
This video took a really long time to make.
It turns out that doing tons of research
and reading a bunch of books actually
is really time-consuming.
So I hope you enjoyed this video,
and I'll see you next time.
Bye!
In any case, in addition to the names
scrolling past the screen right now, I'd especially
like to thank...
I hope that's right.
Knuckles the echidna in a pair of huge googly eyes
on a flaccid penis.
It's changed again!
KayPlaysDota,
Daniel Vincent Chilton, Mike Stanley,
Philip Huber, Lissy Roberts,
ScarthoraxLordOfTheRoaches,
MrClonem,
Mackenzie Cockerill,
MonsSilverplatzTunestrum,
Sammy J, Eugene Butler,
Jordan Tullis, Owen Piper,
Bill Mock, RecoveringZombie,
Emily O, YoungCowrie,
Jason Walter,
Caleb McMurphy,
Jay Logan, FintlyBoicCopley,
Femininja,
Parker Anderson, Silas Pumpkins,
Ash Stryker,
Sean Kemp, David the Benevolent...
David the Benevolent Malevolence,
Amy Lech,
Brennan Arts, Alexander Corbett,
Olivia Mello,
John Cantwell, Marco Shard,
Malarkey Bingo, Eric Hunter,
Lady Naga,
Spilt Coffee, Zachariah Scott,
Siegfried SlayerOfTheImmortalDragon,
Robert Phillips,
Rebecca Washam, HiraRawor,
Cafzile, Alex Lemkowicz,
Graf and Blackpaw,
Jeffrey Theobald, Jack Harvey,
Casey Schneibel,
David Rose, Samayel,
Scott Gertin, Thadwa Zalewski,
Alicia Parker Martell,
Cav P, Kelly M. Canippy,
Jenny Angel, and Kieran.
Conilingus is unnatural for women!
Ha ha! I am not a
chain-smoking Mickey Mouse, I am just
a regular woman who hates Conilingus!
Ha ha! That's terrible, don't
use that. I mean, use it if you want to, but
it's terrible. Let me try it again.
Ow! Fuck!
Just bashed my fucking arm against the tripod
trying to make this thing work.
