All were angry and many were frightened, and they converged on City Hall demanding and pleading.
And more than 200 were hauled off to the station house.
The first cases of AIDS in the United States were reported in 1981.
By 1983, there were over a thousand reported cases in the U.S.,
and by that point, already half had proven fatal.
Unlike other high-mortality-rate viruses like Ebola,
HIV tended not to be something one may eventually recover from once infected.
Part of the slowed government response was because of the epidemic curve of the HIV virus.
Unlike Ebola virus, it was gradual, with symptoms appearing in a matter of years instead of days.
It's easier for epidemiologists to encourage behavior changes in a population
for an in-your-face disease like smallpox or Ebola virus,
but AIDS, despite its near 100% mortality rate,
was so slow-moving that not only was mass behavior change difficult to encourage,
most people who spread the virus did not themselves even know that they were infected.
Drug use was a risk factor. Unprotected sex was also a risk factor.
But many risk factors were not in people's control.
For instance, the 1980s was not a great time to be a hemophiliac.
But another aspect was the factor that the epicenter of the outbreak
was not in middle-class straight white families,
but the gay community in urban centers like San Francisco, Los Angeles, and New York City.
Since all of the earliest cases were discovered in gay men,
it was easy for lawmakers to moralize the outbreak,
not just as a sexually transmitted disease, but also of moral degeneracy.
Pat Buchanan, who was the leader of White House Communications at the time,
wrote about AIDS,
Reagan didn't seem to understand the seriousness of the epidemic
until his friend Rock Hudson announced that he was HIV positive four years into the epidemic.
But even then it wasn't enough to get the administration to act on it.
Dr. Donald P. Francis, an epidemiologist within the CDC assigned to the AIDS outbreak,
later wrote,
Much like firefighters confronting a fire,
early aggressive action pays off,
whereas slow passive action leads to massive destruction.
The CDC, with the help of Francis, developed a comprehensive plan in 1985
to help stop the spread of HIV,
which had by now infected thousands.
But the Reagan administration rejected it outright.
The administration told epidemiologists within the CDC
to look pretty and do as little as possible.
Surgeon General C. Everett Koop was explicitly banned by the Reagan administration
from addressing the AIDS crisis
when in 1986 he broke with orders and did address what was by now a pandemic.
He was attacked from within all areas of the administration.
The powers that be within the CDC refused to stand up to their bosses
higher up in the Reagan administration.
Director of the CDC James Mason, regarding the CDC's failure to act,
later said,
By the late 1980s, with now hundreds of thousands of new cases of HIV,
it wasn't an issue of passivity, but of active obstruction.
An increasingly popular narrative surrounding the AIDS epidemic of the 1980s
was that there was nothing to be done to stop it,
that the onus was solely on the infected,
and there was nothing but their own behavior to blame.
But the spread of HIV-AIDS in the United States was not inevitable,
and had the powers that be acted sooner,
millions of lives could have been saved.
This is what happens when governments fail the people they are sworn to protect.
Healthcare is a right! Healthcare is a right! Healthcare is a right!
So, yeah, anyway, today we're going to talk about rent.
Let he among us without sin be the first to condemn!
Well, fortunately, I have literally never sinned.
So condemn away I shall.
Okay, so here's the thing, full disclosure,
I have always hated rent,
for basically the same reason I hate Reality Bites.
Yes, even before the movie came out, and yes,
despite the fact that I lived in the East Village of New York City
the first time I saw it on Broadway and was surrounded by rent-heads,
or, hell, maybe even because of that.
And the other thing is, the older I get,
the more things I find about rent that annoy me.
Like, when I was a freshman at NYU,
I was, like, surrounded by these rent-heads who were, like, it me,
and I'm like, well, you know, I guess you're not completely wrong,
you know, trust Fun Babies.
And then later, I eventually burned a bridge over someone
who insisted that rent was beyond criticism
because Jonathan Larson died of AIDS.
He didn't. And even if he did, no.
I actually won the ticket lottery for this sucker twice.
So, sorry, stage-so-apologists, I'm not here for you.
This ain't a stage-show-good-movie-bad kind of episode,
so hunker down, y'all!
Not to mention, of course, hating dear old mom and dad.
Thing is, the movie does exist in a realm of bad,
partially separated from the stage show by virtue of adaptation sickness,
and it is not a good adaptation,
but a lot of my problems with rent are with rent as a whole.
So this one goes out to all the people who asked me to deconstruct rent
like I did with Schumacher's Phantom,
and to you, I say, I can't.
Sorry.
Hey, mister.
She's my sister.
And the truth about rent's adaptation is it's not really that inept.
I mean, although there are some decisions that are like, what?
You're what you are.
But the thing that makes rent the movie fail
is the same basic affliction Phantom suffered from.
The filmmakers didn't know how to translate the stage musical effectively.
And similar to what we discussed with the Phantom adaptation,
its main failure is stripping the source material
of the theatrical elements that make it flow
and replacing it with, you know, mostly montages.
From the soul of a young man.
A young man.
Some on-screen dialogue.
You want me to be your slave?
You want me to just obey your every wish?
More scenes, less singing, setting leases on fire.
But in the end, it has more in common with the adaptation of Les Mis than Phantom.
It's just kind of a boring musical made by a boring filmmaker
who never seemed terribly comfortable with the source material.
And in fairness to the original work,
the movie is much more un-good than the Broadway show.
And it is important to note that rent is one of the first mainstream-ish works
with any kind of substantial LGBT representation.
And hey, this is also one of the rare representations of a bisexual character,
although she, of course, is the slutty McSlutter Slutterson
who wants to slut it up with every living human.
Because, bye.
There will always be women in rubber flirting with me.
Rent was a step.
It was a step in helping to humanize the LGBT community
and urban centers to a broader audience
who might not have humanized them otherwise.
You know, I'm not here to deny that.
That said, I don't have much nice to say about Rent,
so if it was, like, integral to your childhood or something,
you probably might want to sit this one out.
Rent.
If there was one wrong directorial choice
to embody the countercultural discontent of the youngs,
it was Chris Columbus.
Fresh off voice-of-a-generation avant-garde tentpoles
like Home Alone, Mrs. Doubtfire, and the first two Harry Potters.
Hell, maybe that's why Benny, the alleged sellout,
is, unlike the stage show, easily the most sympathetic character in the movie.
Columbus is like, here's a guy who knows what's up.
If you want to produce films and write songs,
you need somewhere to do it.
Invest your money wisely, Benny,
and use that money to fund your passion project five years from now.
And meanwhile, your old friends will still be poor
and wondering why the cruel, cruel world
is forcing them to pay rent to live in a building.
Anyway, I can't speak to your local community theater production of Rent,
but the problems that most people have with Rent
are not necessarily unique to the movie.
Mark, are you there?
Are you screening your call?
It's Mom.
Hi, I just wanted to call and say we love you.
But they are certainly more pronounced.
There are times when we're dirt broke,
and hungry, and freezing,
and I ask myself,
why the hell am I still living here?
And then they call.
F*** you, Mark.
God, this f***ing movie wakes the inner walker-wielding granny in me
yelling at these kids to get off my lawn.
And these damn kids are from the generation before mine.
So yeah, the reason why Rent the movie fails
has a lot in common with why Phantom the movie did not work.
But, you know, we've already covered that ground.
I'm more interested in Rent as part of the grander, counter-cultural canon.
Do you feel left behind by the system?
A system that, say, doesn't take your art seriously,
or maybe failed to act on an epidemic before it became a pandemic.
A system that profited off life-saving drugs,
that failed to fund research.
There are over 140 drugs out there that the FDA has identified as possibilities.
That stigmatized the sick,
that looked the other way when hundreds of thousands of people in our own country were dropping dead.
I think we'd all like a generation-defining musical that really takes the system to task.
But Rent ain't it.
Oh.
Mama who bore me,
Mama who gave me
No way to handle things
Who made me so sad
The stage musical is a popular format to try and capture the discontent of the... something.
It is the music of a people who will not be slaves again
We have been left behind by the system. The musical.
There's a lot of those.
But Rent is literally based on the first we have been left behind by the system.
The musical.
Oh no, c'io milionario
Se fa segno il buon Dio
La Bohème was the original... that.
Puccini's La Bohème was arguably the start of the mainstream counter-cultural Fightin' the Man musical.
It is the basis of not only Rent, but many modern films and musicals.
Most notably Moulin Rouge, which although based on La Traviata,
borrows arguably more from Bohème than Traviata,
or the film from which it takes its name, but not its exclamation point.
I'd summarize the plot, but it's basically identical to Rent.
Swap out tuberculosis with AIDS, the Latin Quarter with Alphabet City,
the 1840s with the 1980s, and Americanify the characters' names a bit.
I'm Roger
Puccini's Bohème was popular because its characters were relatable,
and the story was emotionally charged.
The real revelation here is that his opera is about an underclass.
He isn't writing about kings or dukes,
but about starving artists who feel that they've been left behind.
It is truly a universal story, translatable to any era.
Phantom of the Opera also draws a lot of inspiration from Bohème
in that it goes a long way with raw, simple, shallow emotionality.
But the difference between Phantom and Rent is
Phantom wasn't trying to make a grand statement about society.
And the truth is, La Bohème isn't either. Not really.
It exists more in the same vein as Moulin Rouge.
You're the voice of the children of the revolution!
But what is the revolution?
I mean, it's not a socialist revolution, or a class revolution, or...
We have freedom!
Beauty, truth, and love!
Okay.
See, they use terms like revolution in Moulin Rouge,
but really, it's about emotionality with an artistic movement set as the backdrop.
Shows like this have romantic ideas in the guise of revolution,
but none of them challenge any existing power structures
in a way that might alienate the wealthy audience,
especially as portrayed in the movie.
In Cyberland, we only drink...
Diet Coke.
Yeah, that'll show The Man.
Look at those monocles poppin' everywhere.
Every decade sorta had its own.
The 1960s had Hair, the 70s Jesus Christ Superstar,
80s had Les Mis, 90s had Rent, 2000s...
wanted to have Spring Awakening, but really, they had Avenue Q.
They all tried to capture the voice of the class of youngs that feel left out of the system.
Although, all of these are what George Ishikawa has called bourgeois or finished theater.
In other words, they frame themselves as revolutionary,
but continue to push the voice, worldview, and values of the status quo.
In this case, middle-class white kids who want to pass off their home movies as true art.
From here on in, I shoot without a script.
Without a script? Oh, Mark, you visionary.
See, this is what I mean when I say that Rent's primary purpose
is to validate a certain subsect of the theater going public
rather than bring any theater of the oppressed to the amasses.
This is an idea developed by revolutionary Brazilian dramatist Augusto Bol,
who developed the idea of theater of the oppressed.
And Bol takes a Marxist reading to pretty much all theater on this subject, so bear that in mind.
Echoing Marx, Bol argues that the dominant art is the art of the dominant class,
who control the means to disseminate art.
In this case, Broadway shows.
All of these shows revolve around the social discontent of some underclass,
but the shows did not reach the mainstream because some underclass propelled them there.
Rent did claw its way up from off-Broadway, yes,
but only because it found success with the people who had money.
Only thing to do is jump over the moon.
Hamilton is a perfect example of this phenomenon in action right now.
High demand and extremely limited quantities
mean that only the wealthy control access to the stage show.
A lottery system does exist that sells tickets for $10,
but there are 21 of these tickets per show and thousands of entrants.
Real access comes in the form of people with thousands of dollars to drop on tickets.
And because Broadway shows are so uniquely expensive in terms of consumable art,
they have to walk a fine line between being trendy,
maybe even a little edgy,
but not enough to put the people with money outside of their comfort zones.
It presents a multi-culti hip-hop narrative about the life of Alexander Hamilton
and the foundation of the country,
but it is ultimately really, really reassuring about the American experiment.
Who lives, who dies, who tells your story?
Who lives, who dies, who tells your story?
The ruling class does.
You remember you belong to me.
If you want people to hear your message,
it first has to get the okay from your wealthy patrons.
I mean, it's no coincidence that the first hip-hop musical to become a huge hit
happens to be about the whitest thing ever.
And Hamilton is excellent, don't get me wrong.
It's just not here to challenge any ideas on American exceptionalism
or start any revolutions.
I'm with you, but the situation is fraught.
You've got to be carefully taught.
If you talk, you're gonna get shot.
Does every musical need to necessarily challenge the culture it's trying to sell itself to?
God, no.
I mean, how else would I see Phantom for the 20th time?
One time only!
But anyway, not every musical, even the ones with explicit revolutionary text,
needs to be trying to tear down the system.
But what would a revolution look like if it had been included in Rent
rather than the subtext being reject the system instead of change it?
Well, probably what was going down in Alphabet City in the 80s in the real world.
Thousands of demonstrators demand that New York City do more
to help those suffering from AIDS.
Protests, societal upheaval, all those unpretty things
that were very much going on during the AIDS crisis,
they were not designed to make the type of person
with hundreds of dollars to drop on a Broadway show ticket comfortable.
Do you think you've really accomplished a great deal?
Yes, I think we do. What else can we do?
But Les Mis does not position itself in opposition to the culture it is trying to sell itself to.
Neither does Hamilton.
But Rent does.
And if your musical spins its entirety dressing down the phony baloney culture
while at the same time kind of being its very embodiment,
then we may need to have words.
Rent the Broadway Musical was met with much more universal acclaim
Rent the Broadway Musical was met with much more universal acclaim
than Bohem a century prior.
It wasn't for another couple of years until we started seeing pushback against Rent.
The movie was what made society as a whole really start to turn on Rent.
So thank you for that movie.
See, Rent's heyday came and went,
and a few more years passed,
and then another few more years passed,
and then they threw another few years on for posterity.
And they made the movie with the original cast.
So by the time the movie comes out, it's like,
yeah, sure, sure, you're in your 20s.
And they went hard trying to keep the original cast,
which was just weird.
Rosario Dawson and Tracy Toms are the only people who seem happy to be here.
Everyone else is in their 30s, and they've moved on with their careers,
but here they are, pretending to be in their early 20s, and it's weird.
Many of the songs are cut and turned into dialogue,
which makes for an even draggier experience than it might have been.
Even with the opening number, when they are asking themselves,
how we gonna pay, how we gonna pay next year's Rent?
Rent, Rent, Rent, Rent, Rent, Rent, Rent.
The music is arranged similarly to the shows, which is a group number.
But in the show, everyone in the neighborhood doesn't all collectively decide
to stop paying rent at the same time.
It's more like, you know, like a Greek choir type thing.
Unlike in the movie, where it appears to be a riot.
And like, okay, so Benny turns off their heat, right?
So they have to burn their precious art creations for warmth.
This is also lifted directly from La Boheme.
This is how that starts. Burning our art for warmth.
It's like an irony thing.
But then they throw it out the window.
I mean, the whole thing is full of adaptive changes
that don't really stand up to modest scrutiny.
Joanne and Maureen's relationship never gets resolved in the movie.
Like, they break up and then are together again at the end when they find Mimi.
I guess they get back together off-screen somewhere.
This works better in the show because they break up and get back together constantly,
and that's the joke.
The movie starts with Seasons of Love,
which is an odd decision as the whole point of that song
is that it happens after intermission to impart that a year has passed.
So at the front of the movie, it's just like a song that's there.
But people know it, so let's start with that, I guess.
Lots of 2005 vehicles here in 1989.
Nobody has 80s hair.
Mark's camera has no sound recording apparatus.
Why are we taking a train to life support if everything's in Alphabet City?
A neighborhood with no train access.
Roger returns to Manhattan from Santa Fe via the Williamsburg Bridge.
Some of the worst CGI cold-weather breath in history of moviedom.
Lazy, uncreative use of your setting.
Or just strange use of setting.
Is he about to try to sell me a really manly truck?
There are a lot of problems with Rent that are movie-specific,
but my interest is more comprehensive.
And it starts with the fact that...
Dorothy and Toto went over the rainbow
To blow off fancy air
Rent is a musical about selfish, horrible people,
framed like freedom fighters.
They show profound entitlement over other people's rights and property,
but it is framed like romantic rebelliousness.
A restaurant owner begs them,
please don't patronize our restaurant, please.
Please, no, no, not tonight. Please leave.
They then ignore him when he asks them not to move the tables around.
Please don't move the tables.
Hey, Rosie, let's put these tables together.
No, no, no, no.
Maureen is an emotionally abusive cheater who gaslights all of her partners.
Angel comes into wealth at the beginning by killing a dog.
But sure as I am here, that dog is now in doggy hell.
Mimi is a self-destructive codependent enabler.
Collins honors the memory of his dead lover
by hotwiring a local ATM to dispense cash for him and his friends
when you plug his name in.
I rewired the ATM at the food employee.
Now he needs the code A-N-G-E-L.
And Mark. Sweet Mark.
You might be the worst thing to have ever happened.
And you are... I'm just here to...
To appropriate your tragedy for my art without having obtained permission.
I hope that's cool.
Rent the Movie really has two stories that don't mesh
when you give it more than a passing thought.
The story of the tragic AIDS havers
and the love triangle between Joanne, Mark, and Maureen.
And these two things have nothing to do with each other
besides that they know each other.
But really, Mark and Maureen, while they feel bad for the AIDS havers,
I guess their stories are more about their poetry and their art.
I gotcha, gotcha, gotcha, gotcha, gotcha, gotcha, gotcha, gotcha!
Mark has his aimless documentary and Maureen her terrible performance art.
Both have loving support structures and come from wealthy families
and none of these people have AIDS or really any reason not to pay the rent
other than the fact that they feel they shouldn't have to
because art and selling out are something.
And I ask myself, why the hell am I still living here?
Fuck you!
You know that song, Common People?
Still you'll never get it right
It's when you're late in bed at night
Watching roaches climb the wall
If you called your dad he could stop it, oh yeah
Aw, look Mark, someone wrote a song about you.
In the show it's more obvious that Maureen is terrible
and kind of a narcissist, and this is really a pastiche of bad performance art.
Gotcha, gotcha, gotcha, gotcha, gotcha, gotcha, gotcha, gotcha!
Gotcha, gotcha, gotcha, gotcha, gotcha, gotcha, gotcha!
But in the movie it is played dead fucking straight.
And the suits are in the audience blown away by how real she is.
Moo with me
Laterate, no!
They're mooing with her.
Now, the fact that they are horrible need not be a problem.
I need your help to make my neighbor's yappy dog disappear.
Or even that their horribleness goes unexamined by the characters.
That is, after all, a condition of human behavior.
But the problem, like the faux-revolutionary subtext, is with the framing.
The show doesn't really go anywhere with this.
This type of character is much more effectively explored in Trainspotting.
In Trainspotting, you are meant to relate to the characters, sure,
but it makes no pretense of them being idealists or good people.
It much more successfully dresses down the phoniness of the society that they reject.
Choose life, choose a job, choose a career, choose a family,
choose a fucking big television, choose washing machines, cars,
compact displayers and electrical tin openers.
But at the same time, it doesn't dress them up like they are legitimately too good for society.
They are very obviously not.
So, Rent presents us with a worldview that validates the characters rather than challenges them.
And romantic validation is part of what made Rent so popular.
You know, similar to Bowen before it.
But there are ways that this sort of thing can be...
maybe a little contradictory.
Yes, we are so counter-cultural, like in this scene.
The nadir of the film, where they dance on the table
while the pearl-clutching suits are scandalized by the interests of the Bohemians.
Like, huevos rancheros.
Yeah, eating disorders!
Woo!
Rent's primary theme comes from the conflict between Bohemian ideals
and selling out for financial security.
What rent?
This past year's rent which I let slide.
Yeah, they don't want to pay rent because their friend who owns the building
has reneged on a deal he made with them that they can live there rent-free.
But there is this underlying entitlement that these guys have
that they shouldn't have to pay rent
because they're artists and they don't sell out.
Get off my lawn!
Because working for a show like BuzzLine is completely selling out.
Mark has among the worst resolution to his subplot.
Particularly frustrating to those of us working in journalism today.
Start at $3,000?
He works for a sort of proto-TMZ-style news organization
and makes bank doing it,
but he doesn't like having a job in his chosen field of study
because selling out.
I sold my soul.
Oh, poor baby.
You have to work your way up from a job you don't really like
in your chosen field that pays really well as a starting point for your career?
If I need to finish my own film, I quit!
Mark, you are the worst.
There is a big homeless subplot,
but it's much bigger in the stage show than the movie.
No room at the Holiday Inn, oh no!
But the big thing that is pointed out by this character,
but goes oddly unexamined,
is the fact that none of these people really care about the homeless.
Who do you think you are?
I don't need no goddamn help from some bleeding heart cameraman.
My life's not for you to make a name for yourself for.
Easy, sugar, easy. He was just trying...
Just trying to use me to kill his guilt.
Mark getting called out on it doesn't prompt any change in behavior.
Maureen really doesn't give a shit about their plight.
She only cares about her performance space not being taken from her.
The tent city is just a backdrop.
The problem with the theme of selling out for security
versus adhering to your precious ideals while living in poverty,
with the backdrop of a massive homeless subplot,
which was not there in La Boheme, by the by,
is that it infers that poverty is a choice, and a noble one at that.
Which, sure, Mark has a choice as to whether or not to live in poverty.
Pretty much all of the characters do, except Angel and Collins.
But the homeless do not choose to live on the street
in order to uphold their Bohemian ideals.
So right there we have thematic dissonance number one.
Choosing to live in poverty and romanticizing it
while surrounded by those living in poverty who do not have a choice,
and are repulsed by your romanticizing their tragedy, Mark.
Hey, artist! You got a dollar?
Didn't think so.
Yeah, this prompts no change in him, and is the last time it gets brought up.
The second major theme is that of affliction.
La Boheme is set against the backdrop of tuberculosis,
rent of AIDS, which afflicts far more characters in Rent than TB did in Boheme.
So when you have theme one over here, and theme two over here,
this is where we really start kind of running into problems.
Mark Cohen's character arc, played up in the movie to the point
where, unlike in the show, he is the explicit protagonist,
reminds me so much of Lelena in Reality Bites.
They both exploit their parents,
neither want to sell out their precious art or play by the rules of fucking society,
steal shit, know they'll get away with any rules broken
because they're white kids who come from wealthy families,
and their approach to documentary is just...
Shoot whatever and call it art because it exists, and I made it.
From here on in, I shoot without a script.
To quote Nathan Rabin, last time I checked,
those are called home fucking movies and nobody thinks that's high art.
So we suffer in the cold and ignore our loving families
because suffering equals art, and the homeless are suffering,
and we like them because suffering equals art,
and as long as they don't expect us to recognize their needs as humans,
then hey, maybe they don't think suffering is all that artistic, you assholes.
So in Rent, poverty, despite being confronted on how shitty it is
to try to appropriate someone else's suffering, Mark,
is always justified because art,
and capitalist society is always out to consume you,
which is why you own nothing, you rent,
therefore you are always justified in taking anything you can from society.
I rewired the ATM at the food employee.
It's not stealing because you're an artist and the rules don't apply to you.
You know, poverty is not romantic.
Just throwing it out there.
Anyway, let's tie that back in with the theme of affliction.
Affliction
No day but today
A big theme in Rent is presented in the no day but today motif,
with the central conflict of Mimi and Roger's relationship
being planning for an uncertain future versus living for the now.
Problem here is Rent doesn't try to find a balance,
but rather that planning for the future thing tends to be painted in a more negative light,
especially where Benny is concerned.
You make fun, yet I'm the one
Attempting to do some good
Or do you really want a neighborhood
Where people piss on your stoop every night
The no day but today motif is seen in the life support group,
No day but today
and in the interactions between Roger and Mimi,
a bad idea of a relationship that at least one of them gets some bad juju about,
but here we go anyway.
Your smile reminded me
I always remind people of
It's almost like I have a type
And I'm drawn to self-destructive addicts
See, Roger's ex-girlfriend committed suicide
after finding out that both she and Roger have AIDS.
The suicide part's not clear in the movie, by the by.
His girlfriend April left a note
Saying we've got AIDS
Before slitting her wrists in the bathroom
So the first time we see the no day but today motif
is used at Angel's life support meeting.
In the very next scene, we see it again
when Mimi is trying to get Roger to do drugs with her.
Forget, regret
All life is yours to miss
There is an honesty here,
like that Roger wants to be with her
but isn't allowing himself to because he's afraid to live
and Mimi's trying to get him to open up.
However, this doesn't really work because
this very simple framing,
the fact that Mimi is on the side of the life support people
and therefore in the moral right,
is undercut by the fact that she's trying to enable
a newly clean person to do drugs with her.
Take your powder, take your candle
Your sweet whisper, I just can't handle
The film frames it like Roger is refusing to live
when in reality, he has a very good reason
not to want to spend any time with Mimi.
Namely, that of staying clean
and in that regard, has much more in common
with the people at the life support meeting than with Mimi.
Excuse me if I'm off track
But if you're so wise, then tell me
Why do you need smack?
Their No Day But Today
accepts that any day could be their last
but that doesn't mean they're not going to take care of themselves now.
Mimi's attitude is that you should live for today
instead of taking care of yourself
and planning for the future because you can die at any moment
so you may as well live for the moment and do whatever.
I'm at this moment
as my last
The show does this too, perhaps more pointedly
because rather than Roger's buds
plus Mimi being the chorus
a choice which makes no logical sense by the way
Mimi doesn't really know any of these people except Angel but whatever
In the stage show, the chorus is the entire life support group.
No day but today
Take your powder
Take your candle
So the show does the same thing
only, you know, more.
Roger does eventually help Mimi get clean
but that doesn't last long
and eventually contributes to Roger
leaving New York altogether for like five minutes
before coming back and finding that Mimi has disappeared
and fallen down a deep addiction hole
but they find her and Roger sings at her
and love saves the day
Mimi
It should be noted that Mimi nearly dying
is not brought on by chance like with Angel
but by her own decision to give up on life
She goes back to doing drugs
stops paying her rent
lives on the street
stops taking her AIDS medication
and nearly dies of exposure
and still, and still
she survives
She said
Turn around girlfriend
and listen
to that boy's song
And I'm not going to be a total cold hearted monster
and say that there is no value in that
you know, only mostly
because I realized that Rent was not meant to be
a cautionary tale
more than anything it was intended to give hope
to a portion of the young population that felt like it had no voice
as well as to get a broader audience
to empathize with that population
Rent is not endeavoring to be realistic
it endeavors to provide hope
which it did for many, many people
hence the no day but today attitude
being encouraging to those in dire straits
just because any day could be your last
does not mean life is not worth living
However
However
Roger is doing the actual hard work of self care
on which Mimi is an unquestionable drain
which goes completely ignored once we've decided
that love is the most important thing
love at all costs, love will save the day
and again, I'm not saying that all relationships
portrayed in things need to be
healthy, but it's kind of like
Twilight, the work doesn't exactly
frame it like it's a no good very bad idea
I like watching you sleep
Do you do that a lot?
Just the past couple of months
Rent's biggest departure from La Boheme
is the ending
See, Boheme ends like this
And Rent ends like this
And yes, the play ends this way too
I was heading
towards this warm
white light
And I swear
Angel was there
And she looked good
And also this one
great song that Roger's been trying to write this whole show
and he finally writes it and sings it
and it's like the worst one
How'd I let you
slip away
when I'm longing so
But it
saves her from the AIDS
She's fine
And I have wrestled over this
Rent changes fundamentally
so little from La Boheme
such to the point that it hardly feels relevant to the late 1980s
So why
change this?
Why does Mimi die in La Boheme
but miraculously gets an AIDS reprieve
because Roger sings a song at her
I have always
loved you
In La Boheme, Mimi is
a symbol of innocence and purity
And she just can't survive
in this tough new Bohemian world
That's the price of Bohemia
I guess
But she is not that innocent in Rent
She's like a druggie
and a stripper
So killing her I guess doesn't have that meaning
about innocence lost or something
that they were so into in the Victorian era
So might as well let her live
and get some empowerment
out of her being a survivor
Right?
Oh
And she looked good
But I don't think that is
really the end of it
I think in Rent it's Angel who is the Mimi
because Angel gets the angelic Mimi death
Angel gets to be the embodiment
of goodness where in Rent
Mimi is not that at all
She is flawed and therefore Angel dies
instead of Mimi which is noteworthy
because Angel's counterpart Shunard
does not die in La Boheme
In the show it does depend on the actor
She is a more fleshed out character
For instance she is a compulsive placater
who really does not like conflict
People! Is this a new way to start a new year?
Oh have compassion
And there is a much bigger sense of active agency
But Chris Columbus's
interpretation does not exist
in a character in her own right
just to be inspiration
for everyone else and act as like
a spirit guide after she dies
Angel is there
Chris Columbus's embodiment of goodness and humanity
is more of a prop than one of the main
f***ing characters. You know it's like in Pocahontas
where they were so obsessed with being respectful
that she has literally no character
flaws or character
period. And I think part of that
is that Chris Columbus never seems entirely
comfortable with this character just from a cinematography
standpoint. Take the curious
decision to shoot I'll Cover You
as boringly as they did
Eh let's just walk down
the streets good enough
Look at this it looks like it was shot by an undercover
PI from across the street
This is handled better in the show
which since it's more of an ensemble Angel is more
of a character on equal footing with everyone else
and uh yeah she does
make money killing a dog and
we are supposed to be charmed by this
But soon as I am here that dog is
now in doggy hell. Well this is actually
an element from La Boheme where instead
of a dog it's a parrot so let's ignore
that. So rather than Mimi who in
Boheme is the embodiment of goodness and
innocence in Rent she is the waif
who needs to be saved from herself
with love and Angel
well Angel becomes
the tragic figure of goodness and love dying
because the world is too cruel and corrupt for
her. So Angel's story is resolved
with her becoming an
angel and at the end of the day
both in the stage show and in the movie
Angel is the character with the least of
an arc and she just kinda
goes quietly into that good night
nobly not mad about
it or anything no one is mad
at the system that has failed them
and here's the thing about the theme of
affliction. In the 1840's
no system was going
to save you from tuberculosis
so
while it was a problem
that they romanticized it the way they did back
then same rules didn't
apply so these two themes
didn't really conflict
as they do in a story
about the AIDS crisis in the late 1980's
music
Man I'm not gonna let
you poison me
I threw it on the ground
So I wanna
talk a little bit about
I ain't gonna be part
of your system
that
pump that garbage in another man's veins
There's something
kinda disingenuous when we have a narrative about
the AIDS crisis and the machine we're
raging against isn't the FDA
or pharmaceutical companies or an indifferent
political machine but
gentrification namely gentrification that
affects the privileged white characters
and the face of the encroaching gentrifying
class is a black man who is
pricing out the white boys
which is another issue all together that reflects
basically zero of reality of living in New York
to this day and I don't like it
God
there's just so much to hate
so many things to throw on the ground
like this and this
and that and even this
Anyway this whole theme
of you know poverty versus
selling out rings pretty hollow
when you have all these worried parents calling
constantly. Roger where are you?
Mimi chica. Roger where are you?
Don't make a fuss. Roger where are you?
To mama. Roger where are you?
And honestly the show
is way worse for this such to the point
where I wonder if it isn't trying to highlight our
hero's hypocrisy as everyone but
the two adora-gays has family to go back
to and they're also the only characters
who really seem to have anything to do with AIDS
activism. Angel in the form of his support
group but with Collins the best we get is
this. Expel me from my theory
of actual reality. Which we
can infer has something to do with AIDS activism
because of this. Actual
reality. Act up. Fight it.
He also hints that this is why he
got expelled from MIT and this is all
just lines and subtext this isn't
really explicit and this line
in La Vie Boheme is the last we see of it
and in the end Collins honors Angel's
memory not by doing anything useful
but by robbing ATMs.
I rewired the ATM at the food emporium
now he needs a code
A-N-G-E-L
Yeah that'll get those extortiony
drug prices down. Hey how were
every single one of you able to afford AZT
anyway? Wasn't it like $8,000 a
year in 1989? AZT
break. Do you bohemians all just have
really good health insurance and nobody's talking
about it because you don't want to admit you're a part
of the system?
Or that you're getting government assistance and you
don't want to talk about that because system bad?
I know that shit didn't just fall off the back
of a truck.
Rent's idea of a revolution is a purely
symbolic one and
that's kind of the point. It's built
to reinforce world views, not
change anything. Because the reality
of the AIDS epidemic was not romantic
tragedy a la Mimi's inevitable fate
in La Boheme. It was not Manic Pixie
Dream Gaze going quietly into that good
night, but it was fighting and scratching
and clawing and quilting
and demanding that their humanity be recognized
and not devalued on basis
of sexual orientation, which it very much
was in 1989.
The reality of the AIDS epidemic does
not work as a fuck the system musical because
rejecting the system was not what
eventually changed it. What
changed it was holding the system to account.
You have the FDA
giving you a drug. So far
you've got AZT.
Which I can't take because it's
far too toxic.
The FDA says there is nothing
else that is
worth anything. That does not
mean that there is no place for rent or that you're
a bad person for liking it or that the music
isn't catchy. But if you care about
the subjects that it champions, rent
is hardly representative.
And that's the real problem with rent. It and
its narrative has overshadowed and sanitized
a painful, terrible, uncomfortable history
that we still live in the shadow
of. Go read Stage Struck by
Sarah Schulman. It's on Amazon. Or go
watch How to Survive a Plague. It's on Netflix.
Or Angels in America. It's on HBO Go.
Or even fucking Dallas Buyers Club.
Yes, it has its own problems, but actually
acknowledges the criminal shortcomings of every power
structure in place during the height of the AIDS crisis.
A light, user-friendly sort of anarchy
does not work in a narrative about the AIDS
crisis, because there is nothing noble in extolling
the virtues of quietly giving in to your
disease when there is a system right there that
can help and is actively, even
aggressively, failing you, but you reject it
because fuck the man. I'm not a part
of your system.
And threw it on the ground.
I don't need your protease
inhibitors. And that is
what rent the movie ends up being.
Sympathetic to an underclass that was
violently screwed by the system, but
ultimately the embodiment of the voice of the
ruling class. That is why a story
about homelessness and the AIDS crisis
ends up being about not
selling out. It advocates for
no revolution other than the revolution
of whatever makes you
as an individual feel good.
It reinforces a worldview in which
the only way to rebel against the system
is to reject it. And it might feel good
to throw it on the ground. And throw the rest
of the cake too.
It gives you a sense
of power in a world that makes you feel powerless.
But in reality, the only thing
it fosters is actual powerlessness.
Because in rejecting the system,
you are not only failing to tear it down,
you are also forfeiting any voice within it.
Rent takes an inherently political
issue and depoliticizes it to create
something comforting and consumable.
Rent looks pretty and does
as little as possible.
I'm starving for attention,
hating convention, hating pretension,
not to mention, of course,
hating dear old E-Mom and Dad.
Plague!
We are in the middle of a fucking plague!
And you behave like this!
I'd guard the entodo
and cover the rainbow
to blow off empty air.
Plague!
Plague!
Forty million infected
people is a fucking plague!
All we can do is field
a couple hundred people at a demonstration.
That's not going to make anybody
pay attention.
Not until
we get millions out there.
Let the among us
without sin
be the first to condemn!
And I say to you
in year 10
the same thing I said to you
in 1981
when there were
41 cases.
Until we get our acts together,
all of us,
we are as good
as dead.
We want to be
a man!
Healthcare is a right!
Healthcare is a right!
Healthcare is a right!
Healthcare is a right!
Healthcare is a right!
