Hello, Internet. Well, here we are. 500,000 subscribers. Well, actually, by the time I
finish this video it's a bit more than that, but who knew after I promised to do a Q&A
that the Pope would resign? Anyway, when I uploaded my first explanation video just over
two years ago now, I would never have expected this. More than half a million subscribers
and 16 videos with more than a million views? Who knew rapidly spoken educational videos
could be so popular? Thank you, Internet. Now, as promised, though slightly behind schedule,
it's time to answer some of your questions. What's your educational background? I went
to school in New York where I earned two college degrees, one in physics and one in sociology.
After that I moved to London and earned a PGCE in science education and became qualified
as a physics teacher in England. How long does it take to create a video? I've tracked
my time to get an accurate answer and every minute of final video you see takes me between
10 and 20 hours of writing and animating to make. So a typical 5 minute video represents
50 to 100 hours of work. While that's a lot, it doesn't include the research phase which
is difficult to quantify. Some of the videos I've made I've been collecting notes on for
more than a year before starting. What was your favorite video to make? The 2012 video
was the most fun by far mainly because I didn't have to do a lot of complicated research and
I got to complain about things that I don't like. What change would you make to the education
system? Instead of grouping kids by age, I'd try grouping them by ability instead. The
idea that just because a kid is 14 years old they're ready for trigonometry is weird. No
other part of human society organizes itself this way and for good reason. It artificially
slows down the best and the brightest. What do you think should be in the curriculum
but isn't? Computer programming. I was kind of shocked and horrified when I started teaching
in the UK to discover that there were no real computer programming lessons. Of course there
are only so many classes in a day and everybody wants their pet subject taught in school so
the equally important question is what to get rid of to make room for computer programming
and without the slightest hesitation I ditched the foreign language classes. After all computer
programming is getting us closer and closer to a universal translator anyway. What do
you do when you receive pennies? I die a little inside thinking about how political systems
can distribute tiny costs across a large number of people to the benefit of a few. What's
your favorite element? I don't have a favorite but I'm irrationally fond of tungsten mainly
because my wedding ring is made out of it. What's the story behind your logo? It's basically
a personal flag for my love of science and technology. When I first started this channel
I thought I would make more videos about those two things but for various reasons that hasn't
happened yet and besides it's not like there's a shortage of good science channels on YouTube.
By the way if you really like the logo you can get it on t-shirts and now coffee mugs
which is particularly appropriate as coffee is the fuel that without which these videos
could not be made. What do you do in your free time? I like to horseback ride through
the mountains. Nah it's mostly just reddit. Speaking of which... Would you rather fight
100 duck sized horses or one horse sized duck? One horse sized duck. The cube square law
means that the legs of a horse sized duck probably wouldn't be structurally sound. Easy
fight. Are there going to be more politics in the animal kingdom videos? Yes I'm sorry
I know this playlist is unfinished and if any of the videos I've ever made can be said
to be important it's these. I promise at least one more about the single transferable
vote but I don't make any promises about when that will happen. Do you think third parties
will ever gain ground in the United States? No. The problem isn't politics or voter apathy
it's the system that creates the politics and voter apathy. The US election system is
pretty much the worst in the civilized world. Often voting for a third party isn't just
a waste it's also a vote against your own best interests. Third parties really can't
thrive under those conditions. What's one technology you wish to see before you die?
Mortality technology. Where do you get your ideas? It's been my experience that creative
projects are self-sustaining. The more you write the more things you want to write about
and the more you program the more programming ideas you have. For me each video spawns more
videos. The daylight savings one for example originally contained spots for information
about longitude and time zones and the seasons that all got cut but will probably become
their own videos at some point. Also I listened to a monstrous number of audio books and podcasts
if you're interested you can see some of my favorites here. These help keep me in touch
with the wider world and expose me to ideas and information that I wouldn't have come
across on my own. If you could live at any time in history when would it be? I wouldn't.
Allow me to summarize all of human existence with this single graph. What's the best way
to be successful on YouTube? Make videos people want to watch? I'm not trying to be glib here
but when asked this question I see many YouTubers talk about the importance of upload schedules
and managing your social media and collaborations and my experience says that's completely backwards.
If your videos aren't interesting no one will care if you upload them regularly and Twitter
followers don't get you views views get you Twitter followers and people who want to collaborate
with you. I know it's not very helpful advice but it's the most truthful advice I can give.
What's the most interesting fact you've ever been told? It's difficult to pick just one
from an entire lifetime but last year Veritasium visited me in London and walked me through
the process by which trees get water from their roots to their leaves. That sounds really
boring but it was one of the most mind-blowing conversations I've had in a long time. How
often do you engage with professionals while you research? For me being confused and frustrated
with the topic is a vital part of figuring out how to explain it to others so I'd say
95% of research I do on my own. If I'm really out of depth on my topic like the debt video
and the pope video I try very hard to find an expert to look over the final draft of
my script but time constraints and finding trustworthy experts is sometimes a bit difficult.
What's your favorite internal organ? The brain because it's the one that's me. Is there any
part of science you want to be proven wrong? Yes the current interpretations of the ultimate
fate of the universe all make me sad. Can you answer 10 questions in under 30 seconds?
What is your favorite scientific study ever published? Unskilled and unaware further explorations
of absent self-interest among the incompetent. Link in the description. Hogwarts house? Ravenclaw
I'd hope. Celsius or Fahrenheit? Fahrenheit. Kirk or Picard? Picard. Do you wear glasses?
Uh yeah. Favorite empire? The second one. Those monks were awesome. How can a country
be totally self-sufficient as in no imports or exports? Simple resort to a medieval level
of technology. Favorite sport? No. Should science play a bigger role in politics? What
you mean the method by which we determine the truth? Yeah I think it should. Can you
answer 10 questions in under 30 seconds? Apparently. Alright thanks to everyone who
submitted questions. It's been fun, Internet.
