Comfort ye, comfort ye, my subscribers, so saith your goddess, for it is I, the digital
messiah, the online oracle, the social media saviour, yea, verily I say unto you, there
were influencers abiding in the feed, keeping watch over their followers by night, and lo,
I came upon them, and the glory of my posts shone about me, and I delivered unto them
a vision.
Freedom, freedom, fuckin' freedom.
Which matters more?
The freedom to live an authentic life, or the freedom to crush degenerates under the heel
of a jackboot?
As a centrist, I am undecided, but the important thing is we are talking about it.
Hi, I'm Jackie Jackson, host of the Freedom Report, the political talk show where we discuss
important issues, like Mexicans, how dangerous are they?
Muslims, can we stop them?
Tonight we return, once again, to the dangerous transgender trend that is turning your children
into all manner of half-and-halves and in-betweens.
I mean, look at this, they're transing 13-year-olds now, what's next, babies with breast implants?
It makes me want to throw up.
I live in constant fear, and fear is what freedom is all about.
Cut the music!
Tonight, my first guest is Tiffany Tumbles, transgender makeup vlogger and conservative
opinion haver.
And my second guest...
Well, what the hell are you?
You're transgender, you're a man, you're a woman, you're an attack helicopter, what's
your deal?
Well, Jackie Jackson, my, as you say, deal is I don't like society forcing me into tiny
little boxes.
Okay, but are you a man or a woman?
Just tell me.
Well, why does it matter?
Why do you have to know?
Maybe you should examine why it is you feel the need to fit everyone you meet into these
little categories, Jackie Jackson.
Well, can I at least ask your name, or is that now considered cisgender imperialism?
My name is Baltimore.
Baltimore what?
Baltimore, Maryland.
I'm sorry, your name is Baltimore, Maryland?
It is among my names.
Tiffany, what do you make of this?
Look, Jackie, I'm going to be completely real with you.
I am a transsexual.
That means I have a very specific mental disorder called gender dysphoria.
I was born a boy, but I have a female brain because of a hormone imbalance in the womb.
This is a real psychiatric disorder that is verified by science and requires hormones
and surgery for treatment or else I literally cannot function.
It is not a fashion statement.
It is not a trend.
It is not an easy way to feel special and depressed.
It is a very difficult condition to live with.
I'm dying inside.
Okay, so you're both transsexuals then.
No, I am a transsexual.
That is not a transsexual.
That is a trans-trender.
Trans-trender?
What is that?
Is that a gender?
No, it's not a gender.
A trans-trender is a person like Baltimore over here who puts on a dress and puts glitter in his beard
and goes around telling people he's transgender and complaining about misgendering for oppression points.
Actually, it's they.
What?
I use they, them pronouns.
They go around collecting oppression points, as you can see.
Why do you say that, Tiffany Tumbles?
Have I complained about oppression so far?
It seems to me that it is you who has been complaining about your dysphoria.
Isn't it you who is collecting oppression points, Tiffany Tumbles?
No, I'm not saying I'm oppressed.
I'm saying I have dysphoria, which is not society's fault.
It's in my brain.
I was diagnosed.
It's a fact.
It's real.
My pain is real.
And my pain isn't real?
It's interesting that you think that.
Well, what pain are you talking about?
People making fun of you because you dress like a circus act?
Interesting that you mention the circus, Tiffany Tumbles.
Don't you think we should examine why society confines gender-variant people to the circus?
You're not confined anywhere.
You choose to dress like that.
And why do you choose to dress the way you dress?
Because I'm a woman, so I'm dressed like a woman.
Hello.
And I'm non-binary, so I dress non-conforming.
Why should I conceal who I am just to appease small-minded people?
Well, it's a free country.
If you want to be a glitterbeard genderfuck, then go ahead.
But don't go around telling people that you're transgender
because it makes us all look like a bunch of trendy freaks.
But aren't we all freaks in the eyes of society?
Do you think you can purchase acceptance through conformity?
Because that is not freedom, Tiffany Tumbles.
That is simply adding another cell to the prison.
It's not about conforming.
It's about me having an actual medical condition.
You do not have a female brain.
You have a fashion disaster.
Oh, do they?
Well, tell me, Tiffany Tumbles,
when the doctor prescribed your hormones,
did he take a look at your brain then?
What? Of course not.
But you have seen a scan of your brain, yes?
Well, no. Where are you going with this?
I mean, if you've never seen your brain
and the doctor who diagnosed your gender dysphoria didn't look at it,
then tell me, Tiffany Tumbles,
how do you know that you have a female brain?
Bullshit.
That's a good point.
No, it isn't.
Look, there's scientific studies that...
Can you explain to me the difference between a male brain and a female brain?
Are they different colors?
I'm not an expert,
but there's science showing that men and women have brain differences.
I see.
But your doctor never looked at your brain.
So how did he know that you have gender dysphoria?
Well, he asked me questions and I told him about it.
And you told him what, exactly?
That I experience gender dysphoria.
So would you agree then that your gender dysphoria,
and therefore your identity,
is valid not because of any observed facts about your brain,
but because of your...
...feelings?
Well, congratulations, Attorney Frankenfurter.
You backed me into a corner.
Sure, it's because of my feelings.
My feelings of gender dysphoria.
So, tell me, Tiffany Tumbles,
why is it that your feelings about your gender are valid,
but mine, according to you, are not?
This burgeoning brick.
You guys, let's think about this.
If I've never seen my brain,
how do I know I even have a brain?
Well, you probably don't, girl.
Look, Baltimore, I'm sure you have lots of feelings about your gender.
And if you feel cloud gender or deminebula or astroglide
or whatever Tumblr bullshit passes through your mind,
then you do you, girl.
Or, not girl, whatever the fuck you are.
But I want to make one thing very clear.
I am nothing like you, okay?
My gender is not unicorns and glitter.
My gender is a serious psychiatric diagnosis
that I wouldn't wish on my worst enemy.
No, not even you.
My, I'm really getting under your skin, aren't I?
No, well, actually, yes, to be honest, you are.
You're getting under my skin because it really rattles my dysphoria
that you're sitting here claiming to represent the transgender community
when, in fact, you're just making a mockery of my pain.
Your pain?
You're in a lot of pain, aren't you, Tiffany Tumbles?
Well, I can sense the vibrations of your pain across the room.
And I pity you, Tiffany Tumbles.
I pity you because you don't think you're real
until a man in a lab coat signs a prescription pad.
And I can't imagine what it must be like
to have so little confidence in your own reality.
Okay, well, don't patronize me.
I'm just trying to understand, Tiffany Tumbles,
why you think being transgender is all about hating yourself and hating your body.
Why can't trans identity be joyful and celebratory?
No, you don't have to hate yourself or hate your body,
but you do have to have dysphoria.
And if you tell people otherwise, you're just misleading them.
I want to heal the rift inside your heart, Tiffany Tumbles.
Would you please join me in saying a prayer for your wellness?
Actually, I would strongly prefer if you would stay away from any of my rifts.
Oh, goddess of light, please shield and protect Tiffany
against the ravages of inner strife.
Enclose her in your loving arms
and cleanse her of all condemnation and internalized transphobia.
I entreat you, oh great mother,
bathe Tiffany in inner peace, acceptance, and self-care
and rid her of her toxic, cis-normative, true-scum ways.
Amen.
Are we done here?
I don't think I can make it through any more readings from the SJW prayer book.
Tiffany, why are you rejecting the love I am trying to deliver unto you?
Because I'm grossed out by you. That's why.
Okay, then.
Well, namaste, bitch.
Look, why don't we all take a step back
and take a moment just to honor our heroes in uniform
and let them know how much we appreciate their service.
God, I love the troops.
Thinking about the troops makes me wet.
It makes me cum.
Semper fi, boys.
What?
I think I'm starting to wrap my head around this.
Tiffany, your transsexualism,
I have to say I don't love it,
but you do seem to at least be aware that you have some kind of mental disorder,
so I'll give you that.
Whereas, Baltimore, you're what?
Making some kind of statement?
If my existence is a statement,
I think that says more about society than it says about me.
Jackie, what you have to understand
is there have been transsexuals around for a long time.
I've talked to 80-year-old transsexuals,
and they agree with me that all this genderqueer bullshit,
it's just a trend.
It's a fad.
But is it?
For thousands of years,
there have been third gender groups across human cultures.
There's the Hidra of India,
the two-spirit people among Native Americans.
Whereas, binary transsexualism is a medical construct of the 20th century.
Gender dysphoria wasn't even a recognized medical condition until 2013,
meaning that Tumblr is twice as old as the first gender dysphoria diagnosis.
So perhaps it is you, Tiffany Tumbles,
and not I who is following a trend.
Wow, that just blew my mind.
The tables are turned, bitch.
Tiffany, could you explain to me why you decided to become a trans-trender?
He's not Native American, though.
They.
They.
You know, it's kinda hard not to call you he when you have a fucking beard.
If you were actually trans and you actually had dysphoria,
then you wouldn't be comfortable with that.
Your Honor, in my defense, it is a glitter beard.
Okay.
Well, that's very 2019, very gender, very they.
But what it isn't is two-spirit.
Look, the SJWs don't even agree with this.
They think it's racist.
White people have two genders.
Pick one and sit down, dude.
Yeah, that's a good point.
Two genders.
Two genders.
Attack helicopter.
Attack helicopter.
Two genders, only two genders.
How many genders?
Two.
Attack helicopter.
Attack helicopter.
Two genders.
Two genders.
You're just saying that you're me and talking in a whiny voice.
That is not an argument.
You know, kids, the one thing you'll always have to deal with in life is assholes.
It's hard to be yourself, but it's worth it.
Let's be ourselves.
Let's totally be ourselves.
All right, that's enough of this.
You know, as a biological female, I honestly don't understand any of this tranny shit.
Okay, that was a hard T.
Now, does my husband sometimes wear panties around the house and ask me to call him Mommy's Little Slut?
Well, sure, but that is a matter between her and the Lord.
Let's best not think about it too much.
Anyway, Tiffany, my brain has an easier time processing you than whatever is going on over here.
So, congratulations, you're the winner.
That was some excellent free speech.
Okay.
Great.
So, in conclusion, trans-trenders are real and probably dangerous.
Make sure to protect your children.
As for how many genders there are, you know, I'm going to take the centrist route and say two and a half.
All right, that's our show.
This has been the Freedom Report, where the debate never stops.
Except when the show is over.
Get out!
The girl can't help it.
She's a Libra.
Behold, the non-binary lamb who was despised and rejected.
They gave their cheek to them that mocked their beard and hid not their face from shame.
But lo, Tiffany, the persecutrix, trendier than thou, a shady queen,
came next upon her friend Justine and sought her counsel thus.
Goddammit, Justine.
I just can't with these trenders anymore.
I simply cannot.
You know, you can just text me here and I'll come open the door.
Okay.
Seems a little formal.
Ugh.
You look great, hon.
Cute.
Justine, you look like absolute shit.
What happened?
Did the cat girl finally beat you up?
No, I just—look, I slept in my makeup, okay?
Leave me alone.
I've been having a difficult time.
Are we serving a little depression moment?
Jesus.
Well, don't leave me out.
I saw you on the Freedom Report today.
Okay, girl, can we talk about ladybeard Baltimore, Maryland?
Ugh, add that one to the crazy tranny hall of fame.
Really?
You're happy with the way that went?
You feel good about that?
You feel good about yourself right now?
Well, why wouldn't I?
Tiffany, there is nothing more sad and pathetic and desperate and low in this world
than a tran who thinks she's better than other trans.
It's like a drunk feeling superior to a junkie.
You seem to think that you're queen of the world
because you're hanging on to societal acceptance by two fingers instead of one.
Well, you're not, bitch.
You're just an insecure, frightened little queer
who's determined to use the one ounce of power you have to tread other people down.
And if I'm being honest, I don't find that very admirable.
Your eyelash is coming unglued.
My life is coming unglued.
Ugh.
Look, it's not like I'm coming after trannies who just can't afford to transition
or don't have the social support.
It's not like Baltimore is doing everything he can to pass
and people just treat him like a freak for no reason.
They. It's they.
Are we really saying they now?
In private?
Yes, we are. So get used to it.
My name is Justine.
I think misgendering is toxic because I care about people's feelings.
Ugh.
I always forget that you're, like, actually an SJW.
I always forget that you're actually an asshole.
Why do I even hang out with you?
Oh, because you hate yourself?
And you have to believe there's hope for me?
Because if there's hope for me, there might be hope for you?
Wow, you're developing self-consciousness.
Where'd you learn that trick?
Gigi?
Tiffany.
Have you ever been bullied?
Oh, let's see. Let me think.
Oh, only K through 12, nine hours a day.
But you don't see me going on talk shows to play the victim.
No, I see you going on talk shows to play the bully.
I think you grew up getting bullied for being a sissy
till you started passing as a woman.
And then you got a little taste of normal,
and now you want to be the one who bashes the queers.
Bash them?
If anything, I'm the one defending trans people
from appropriation and misrepresentation by these trenders.
You said on air that Baltimore grosses you out.
Do you really expect me to believe that your motivations here
have nothing to do with your own self-loathing?
How could it be self-loathing when Baltimore is nothing like me?
Okay, then it's just bigotry. That's even worse.
Oh, it's not bigotry.
Look, I shouldn't have said grossed out, I'll give you that,
but he does, they do make me uncomfortable.
And why do you think that is?
Ugh, I got secondhand dysphoria looking at someone so burgeoning.
Ugh, it makes me want to down a bottle of hormones.
Make sure I never look like that.
Bitch, secondhand dysphoria, what is that?
You know when you look at a tranny and you just clock everything
and you feel like sympathetic vibrations of dysphoria?
Yeah, I do know what you're talking about,
and I'll tell you why it happens.
When you're early in your transition and you're doing everything you can to pass,
you develop a really sophisticated eye for every little thing that makes you clockable.
Then you turn that sophisticated eye onto other trans people
and you project your dysphoria onto them.
I buy that.
Yeah, well that is absolutely not a valid reason
to police other trans people's presentation.
Secondhand dysphoria is not valid.
The fact that you project your dysphoria onto other people
is your problem and your problem alone.
And you need to deal with that issue in private, girl,
not on a fucking talk show.
Yeah, you're probably right about that.
But it still doesn't make Baltimore, Maryland any more valid.
Tiffany, let's be pragmatic about this.
Suppose everything you're saying is true.
Suppose the only real trans people are dysphoric, binary transgender people.
Transsexuals.
Every time you say the word transsexual, I feel like it's 1978.
Are you 80 years old?
I guess you could say I'm not the trendiest person.
Haha.
Look, suppose you're right,
and everyone who doesn't meet your definition of a transsexual
is some kind of confused trend follower.
Even if that were true, and to be clear, it isn't,
what you're doing harms even the trans people you think are valid,
because virtually every trans person
goes through a period of being confused about their gender
and of having nonconforming expression,
and you're going around enforcing a stigma against that.
Didn't you ever have doubts about your gender?
Weren't you ever androgynous?
Oh, yeah, I mean, I was never that burgeoning,
but I had my little cringe year being a nonbinary SJW.
Uh-huh.
And one of the great things about nonbinary identities
is they give trans people the conceptual space to exist
even when neither gender really fits them,
whether that's for their entire life or just for a couple months.
Hasn't it occurred to you that being shamed and berated
for being a trender during your exploration year
might not have been the most helpful thing?
Not really.
I have dysphoria, so if anyone called me a trender,
I'd eventually prove them wrong.
That's all I'm saying.
If you're not a trender, then transition.
Prove me wrong.
But the stigma you perpetuate
against gender confusion and experimentation
keeps trans people in the closet and delays transition.
It alienates baby trans from the community
that should be welcoming them
instead of publicly humiliating them.
And when you appoint yourself the public decider
of whomst is really trans,
the Torquemada of the trender inquisition,
you're terrorizing a lot of people
who are genuinely trying to figure themselves out.
Okay.
But then how do we decide which tr**neys are valid?
We don't.
This is where I'm losing you,
because trans trenders are absolutely a thing.
Like, undeniably.
I've talked to people who've literally told me
they used to be trans trenders.
So some people question their gender
but end up deciding they're not really trans.
There is nothing wrong with that,
and those people still aren't being helped
by public shaming.
Well, maybe they wouldn't be confused in the first place
if SJWs weren't going around telling people
they don't need dysphoria to be trans.
You know, it's one thing if teenage girls
want to dye their hair pink and call themselves
demi-boys for most of sophomore year,
but some of these kids are actually
going to medically transition.
And soon, we're going to have an epidemic
of detransitioners on our hands.
And there's going to be TERFs publishing
I-Told-You-So op-eds in every major newspaper.
Now, maybe you think that's worth it,
just to make sure no one ever feels
invalidated for any reason.
But I think that's highly irresponsible.
Look, if you're so worried about people
feeling pressured to medically transition,
then what you should be doing is
working to make the trans community
as inclusive and welcoming as possible
to gender non-conforming people
and non-binary people, and people who are
questioning, and trans people who don't
medically transition. But instead,
you're doing the exact opposite.
You're telling everyone that medical transition
is the only way to be valid,
and if anything is pressuring people to medically transition,
it's that.
Justine, I think you're a good person.
Maybe too good.
And that's why you're trying to have compassion
for everyone, but at some point,
you have to protect yourself.
We live in a world of Jackie Jacksons
who don't understand trans people
and don't think we're real. So we need
to have an explanation of what it is to be trans
that's based on facts and not
feelings. And the most factual
explanation is transmedicalism,
which is the idea that transsexualism
is a diagnosable mental disorder
called gender dysphoria.
There's science to back this up, it's accepted
by medical professionals, and it clearly
explains why we are valid,
unlike Rachel Dolezal,
and snowflake gender teenagers,
and people who identify as cats.
Okay, I see the appeal,
but I don't think transmedicalism
is as validating as you think it is.
Why not? I'll put it bluntly.
Why does having gender dysphoria
make you a woman? Because gender dysphoria
means I have a female brain.
No it doesn't. I'm sorry to tell you,
but the science does not say what you think
it says. There may be neurological
causes of gender dysphoria,
but at the end of the day, all dysphoria
is is discomfort in a male body,
or a male social role, or however you want
to put it. And wanting to
be a woman is not the same
thing as being a
woman. Not by any means.
Girl, where are you going with this?
What is this? Are you becoming a TERF?
No, I just don't think your theory actually validates
our womanhood. Well, if you're right,
that's a real problem. Because
we need to have reason, and science,
and logic, and facts on our side
so that we can explain to society
that we are valid, and that we are real,
otherwise,
bad things. Well, maybe
there's a better theory. Well, okay,
Socrates, let's hear it then.
The way I see it, gender is either
psychological, or biological,
or social. Now my friend
Tabby, the cat girl, she
thinks it's all psychological, that it's
just identity, that whatever you
think about your own gender is true.
And that makes me really uncomfortable.
Because then, what's the
difference between identifying as a woman,
and identifying as a Norwegian forest
cat? It's a difference that Tabby herself
seems not to have much of a
grip on. Girl, that's literally what I've been trying to
tell you about transtrenders this entire time.
Just let me finish. If gender is strictly
biological, then that's game over
for trans people, unless you make some kind
of wrong brain and the wrong body argument,
but I told you I'm not buying that.
So that leaves gender as a social
construct. Are you going to try to make me read Judith
Butler again? I'll summarize it.
Gender is a series of gestures.
It's called performativity.
It's the way you dress. It's the way you speak.
It's the way you act. It's the way you
relate to other people. Through
transitioning, we habituate to the
gestures of womanhood, and socially
that makes us women. Regardless
of biology or psychology, checkmate
transphobes.
Okay.
The problem with that is that it's both
too exclusionary and too
inclusive. It excludes a lot of
trans people who can't transition for
circumstantial reasons, but whose dysphoria
is very real. And it includes
every trans-trender,
drag queen, fetishist, and two-bit
cross-dressing comedian in a dine-out
wig. Uh. Well.
Do you really believe that a man who plays a woman
on stage becomes just as much of a
woman as you and me?
Yes?
Bitch, no you don't! Yeah, you're right.
I'm full of shit. I know
you are. Because you're an SJW.
And SJWs hate performativity
theory almost as much as they hate me.
Well, they only hate it because they don't understand it.
They think it invalidates non-binary identities,
but in fact it's the most rational way
to explain non-binary identities.
How can you perform a non-binary
identity? Simple. You learn the rules
so you can break them. Wearing a
beard and a dress communicates ambiguity.
Even the gesture of declaring
I am neither a man or a woman
is a speech act that removes
the speaker from the semantics-
Shut up. This is too much philosophizing.
I can't stand it anymore. Why don't you
tell me what's really going on with you?
Why do you look like you've been in a K-hole for a week?
Why are you suddenly so obsessed with
white knighting for non-binary people?
Because I am non-binary.
No you're not!
What are you talking about?
I just feel like
since I started transitioning I've been trying
so hard to fit in and
to perform my gender and to pass
and to just be normal.
But I can't do it anymore.
I just cannot make it work.
I feel like an actor. I feel like
a zombie. Like I'm going through the motions
of this new gender role that's supposed
to liberate me, but that's somehow
just as empty as the old one.
Because I'm just not normal, Tiffany.
I'm a freak. And I'm always gonna be
a freak. Justine, you're not
non-binary. You're gay.
And everyone can see this except you.
Oh come on. I'm not...
I'm not gay.
Justine
was extremely gay.
Protest though the lady may,
there simply is no stopping gayness.
I love
cat girls!
I hate
cat girls, but I also love them!
Oh
abominable fate.
Okay. So I'm a little bit
gay. Right. And you don't know how to reconcile
your attraction to women with your desire
to perform your gender. That's why you
feel this dissonance. Yeah.
I guess that's basically it.
Well it really shouldn't be that hard, girl.
You already came out as a woman, just blurt it out.
Say, hello world,
my name is Justine
and I fuck pussy.
That's a very cis-normative way to say it.
Hello world,
my name is Justine and
I fuck pussy?
Ugh. I feel like a man
when I say it. Yeah, well you should probably
buy a pickup truck then.
Get some of those mud flaps on the back
with the little sexy ladies on them and
you may as well change your name back to
Justine. Okay, well that's
just uncalled for. Girl, I don't know what to
say except I told you so. Sexuality
is just like gender identity.
It is not a performance, it's not a
trend, it's not a choice, it's
just part of who you are and there's
nothing you can do to change it.
I guess
you're right. I guess my theory sucks.
It sucks so fucking hard,
but the good news is you can
unclench your asshole now and do whatever you
want because you're still a woman whether you're
performing a stereotype or not.
So run free, Justine.
Go top a cis woman.
Bang a gay guy. Wear some oversized
flannel. Do whatever you want.
Wow, yeah, I guess
that is pretty liberating. Yeah,
thank god for transmedicalism, right?
Oh, except not
because you just destroyed transmedicalism
with facts and logic, so we have no
theory. We have no theory, Justine.
What do we do now? How do we prove
we're valid? Well, just do what every trans
woman has done since the beginning of time.
Go out and fuck the most brutally
heterosexual man you can find and
be validated and come.
Oh, honey, I have and I will,
but that's not gonna convince anyone but
me. It's not a proof.
It's not a theory. Well, maybe
we don't need a theory. Maybe we
don't need to prove anything.
Bad things, Justine. Bad things.
Well, do we have a theory about why
people are gay? No. They just
are. The only reason we even feel
like we need a theory about trans people
is that society is so unaccepting
of us that it's constantly demanding
we justify our own reality.
Okay, so what am I supposed to tell Jackie
Jackson, then? What am I supposed to tell
the TERFs? That I'm a woman because
reasons? No. Not
even because reasons. Just
because you are. So it's what? A leap
of faith? Oh, great.
I'm sure that's gonna convince all the rational
skeptics. Justine,
it makes us sound completely delusional.
Well, Tiffany, delusion
is what separates us from the
animals. Who do you think built the pyramids
and the cathedrals? Clearly not people
with a perfectly rational worldview.
But what do you care anyway? Aren't you the one who thinks
being trans is a mental disorder? Well, I wouldn't
describe it as the height of sanity,
but I would prefer to think that my whole
life and identity is based on something I
can rationally explain. Well, what are
we, Tiffany? Men? Isn't the
single most obnoxious thing about men
that they think they have to wrap up the entire
world in a little rational box?
Maybe the most important
things in life can't be logically
proved. Can you logically prove
that you love your own children?
No. And the attempt to prove
it is as degrading as it is
futile. Maybe gender identity
is one of those things.
Okay, but then how do I
prove I'm more valid than Baltimore,
Maryland, and the star genders,
and the cat people? Well, maybe
we should stop getting so caught up
in proving our validity to ourselves
that we end up being horribly cruel
to other people. What if we just accept
all the freaks of the world?
At the end of the day, maybe it's just not as
important to have logical proofs as it
is to be empathetic and open-minded
and compassionate.
Kumbaya,
my lord,
kumbaya.
Kumbaya, my lord,
kumbaya.
Kumbaya, my lord,
kumbaya.
Kumbaya.
I have something to tell you.
Here it comes.
I love you.
Okay.
Well, I'm going to get going now.
I have an important
date tonight, drinking vodka cranberries
and reading YouTube comments by myself,
so I'd really
better go do that, but
good luck with your new
life as a male lesbian who fucks cats.
Ugh.
Oh, are you upset?
Just go.
I'm sorry.
Ugh. I hate
this bitch.
But god, she's a yum-yum.
Harken, children.
In this vision you have witnessed
mortal fools upon the screen.
Fools who do not love
themselves. But I,
your goddess, mother, queen,
messiah, I am
nothing like them.
For I am truth.
I am light.
I am in capitalism.
And everything I tweet is
woke. But most importantly,
I am not a
woke. But most importantly,
I love myself.
I love myself so much it makes me wet.
It makes me cum.
Praise be unto me. Hallelujah.
Like, comment, and subscribe.
Amen.
Amen.
Amen.
Thank you for watching!
I hope you enjoyed and learned something new.
If you did, leave a like,
comment, and subscribe!
Bye!
Thanks for watching!
I hope you enjoyed and learned something new.
If you did, leave a like, comment, and subscribe!
Bye!
