Hello, everyone. Today, I'd like to talk about former President Trump's 1776 Commission,
which he set up to promote what he called patriotic education.
The 1776 Commission released the 1776 Report on the 18th of January, just two days before Trump left office.
Incoming President Joe Biden dissolved the 1776 Commission on the first day of his presidency,
and the Commission's report was immediately deleted from the White House website.
This short-lived patriotic education report was intended to summarize, quote,
"...the principles of the American founding and how those principles have shaped our country."
The introduction to the report states,
"...the President's Advisory 1776 Commission presents this first report with the intention of cultivating
a better education among Americans in the principles and history of our nation,
and in the hope that a rediscovery of those principles and the forms of constitutional government
will lead to a more perfect union."
In the couple of days before it was deleted, this report was widely criticized and, well, laughed at
by a variety of historians and academics.
Because as an academic work of history, this report is very silly indeed.
Firstly, the Commission's 18 members included zero professional historians of United States history,
but did find space for former Trump staffers, conservative politicians, and Charlie Kirk.
It's not clear who wrote what parts of the report, it has no listed author or authors,
there's no bibliography, there are no citations for any of its claims.
Some folks on Twitter ran the report through the Turnitin website, a service for detecting plagiarism,
and found that whole sections of the report were simply copied from other places,
largely from previous works by members of the committee.
The report has a very last-minute feel to it in general,
and it seems as though the committee was rushing to get anything at all out the door before Trump's term was up.
It's very short overall, but still manages to fill a lot of space with pictures and lengthy quotations,
and several pages are simply a reprint of the Declaration of Independence in its entirety.
Any college student who's ever had to pad a thin essay to hit a page count will recognize what's going on here.
Various historical facts in the report are incorrect.
Widely criticized, for instance, was its claim that by the end of his life George Washington, quote,
freed all the slaves in his family estate, which is not really true.
As well as the historical, uh, inaccuracies, the report omits enormous parts of American history.
For instance, Native Americans are simply not mentioned at all,
except, of course, for in the fully quoted Declaration of Independence,
which refers to them as, quote, the merciless Indian savages.
It does speak of Americans carving communities out of a vast, untamed wilderness, though,
with zero mention of the people who were already there.
Commenting on the publication of the report, the Association of University Press has described it as being, quote,
plagued by procedural deficiencies that would render it unpublishable as a serious work of scholarship.
It omits citations to any authority, fails to credit or note permissions for its reused content or images,
and was produced without sufficient time for adequate peer review.
So, as a work of history, as an academic work, this is all fairly laughable on the surface.
Especially as a presidentially ordered report published on the White House website.
As a comparison, if we take a look at, say, former President Clinton's One America Initiative report on race relations,
published in 1997, we see that that is much longer, it contains many citations, graphs of relevant data,
and so on. It is a much more rigorous academic work.
So, we could simply let the 1776 report pass into history as a funny footnote at the end of Trump's term in office.
Or his first term in office, if we live in the bad timeline.
But I think we'd be missing an opportunity if we did that.
If we simply dismiss it as a poor academic work, we run the risk of missing that it was not intended to be a good academic work.
The 1776 report was not written to impress or convince a bunch of historians and academic types.
The authors of this report don't care if a bunch of snooty college professors look down at them for not having proper footnotes,
or getting basic historical facts wrong.
This wasn't written for them. This was written for an entirely different audience.
Allow me to go briefly off track here and offer a hopefully relevant anecdote.
So, when I was in high school, I was lucky enough, or unlucky enough, depending on your point of view,
to witness an actual real-life creationism versus evolution debate.
So how this came about was that an exchange teacher who was a rather staunch religious type,
somehow talked my school into allowing him to debate one of the science teachers on the issue of creationism.
And the format was that he would talk for a time and then take questions,
and then the science teacher would talk for a time and then take questions.
Now, in lieu of photographs of these two people, I'm going to be using pictures of two Simpsons characters
who they kinda had the same vibe as, right?
So, the creationist exchange teacher was very passionate about creationism and argued for it effectively.
He was confident in what he said, he used simple language and relatable metaphors,
he smartly avoided preaching his religion too heavily and instead stuck to trying to poke holes in the theory of evolution.
He gave some basic criticisms of evolution and followed up with some basic creationist responses to common arguments for evolution.
His arguments were targeted to his audience, easy to understand, and entirely, completely wrong.
I mean, any halfway intelligent adult could have pointed out the lie in everything he was saying,
except he wasn't talking to halfway intelligent adults, was he?
He was talking to a group of teenage boys who weren't equipped to challenge him on what he was saying.
And his position of authority over that group of teenage boys as their teacher gave an extra weight to what he was saying.
The science teacher, on the other hand, gave out a printed list of facts about evolution
and then proceeded to read them out, boringly.
Now, I don't really blame her for this.
It's not her job to debate whichever weirdo turned up at the school that day looking for an argument.
I got the feeling she simply drew the short straw on who was gonna have to miss a break period in order to debate the creationist.
So we can forgive her low energy to some extent here.
Of course, all the facts on the list she handed out were true, but she wasn't selling them to the audience.
And the creationist had already provided counterarguments for many of them.
She was simply arguing for evolution.
But the creationist was arguing for creationism and against evolution, if you follow.
He wasn't just arguing for his side.
He was trying to define, in the minds of the audience, the form of the larger argument in question.
Much more important than who was technically correct on the facts, which weren't being checked in the moment anyway,
was who could better frame the discussion and then tell the more engaging story within that space.
He wasn't just handing out facts, he was pitching a narrative, one in which a bunch of egghead evolutionist types are,
far from being smart and clever and better than you, actually very silly and easy to trip up with these very simple arguments,
which I'm now going to teach you.
And of course, even if the science teacher had matched the creationist for enthusiasm and rhetorical skill to the actual children in the audience,
the impression would be, well, I guess people disagree about this issue.
It looks like it's still up for debate, which would be a win for the creationist.
The fact that the debate existed at all and was framed as a debate gave the creationist arguments an undue level of respect.
He won once he got the platform to spread his ideas.
The fact that the science teacher didn't properly challenge those ideas was simply the icing on the cake.
So I want to talk about this idea of narrative framing today.
I want to examine the 1776 report as a work of rhetoric, which is what it is.
It is an attempt to persuade, to argue for a particular version of American history.
And it's a version of American history where the facts aren't all that important.
The authors of this report are trying to argue for their version of history.
They're not trying to prove it true.
And that's a subtle distinction, granted, but it's an important one.
Now, of course, the 1776 Commission was dissolved and their report was quickly discredited academically and deleted,
but the version of history it's trying to sell and the motivations behind its doing so sadly haven't gone anywhere.
So we're gonna take a quick read through the report today and see the story it's telling
and the rhetorical tricks it uses to argue its case.
Before we get to that, though, we need to start off by talking about the 1619 Project,
because the 1776 Report is, in many ways, even in name, a response to the 1619 Project.
And to quote the introduction to the project itself,
the 1619 Project is an ongoing initiative from the New York Times Magazine that began in August 2019,
the 400th anniversary of the beginning of American slavery.
It aims to reframe the country's history by placing the consequences of slavery
and the contributions of black Americans at the very center of our national narrative.
So this, too, is self-admittedly an attempt to frame history in a particular way.
It's a response to those versions of history that leave out the consequences of slavery and the contributions of black Americans.
The introductory essay to the project is written by journalist Nicole Hannah-Jones and titled
America Wasn't a Democracy Until Black Americans Made It One.
And this essay opens with the quote,
Are democracies founding ideals were false when they were written? Black Americans have fought to make them true.
And the essay goes on to argue that when the American founders talked about freedom and equality and all that,
it wasn't really true, in large part because they were slave owners living in a slave trading society.
And it goes on to highlight the role that black Americans have played in bringing America closer to those ideals.
Other articles in the project are titled things like
What the Reactionary Politics of 2019 Owe to the Politics of Slavery,
and Why American Prisons Owe Their Cruelty to Slavery, and so on.
It's directly tying modern problems in American society to its history of slavery.
Now, if you want my opinion, well, it's my video, isn't it?
I find the main idea behind the 1619 project to be vitally important and sorely needed,
but the actual project itself is, in a few ways, kind of disappointing, which is unfortunate.
Firstly, it's marred by a rather overstated case in one instance in particular.
Nicole Hannah-Jones' opening essay was published with the claim that
one of the primary reasons the colonists decided to declare their independence from Britain
was that they wanted to protect the institution of slavery.
Now, this makes it sound like the American colonists, as a group,
all decided to declare their independence from Britain so they could keep the slave trade, which is not true.
Now, as far as I'm aware, the British did at one point increase support for the revolutionary cause
in certain areas of the colonies by offering to free slaves who crossed the lines and fought for the British.
And an early draft of the Declaration of Independence even sees Jefferson complaining about this very offer.
But it's a stretch to imply that this was a primary reason for revolt among the colonists in general.
And this is something with which the New York Times eventually agreed,
amending the quote to say that protecting slavery was a primary motivation for some of the colonists.
Now, this was a clarification that really shouldn't have had to have been made.
Historian Leslie M. Harris wrote an article in Politico titled
I Helped Fact Check the 1619 Project, The Times Ignored Me,
in which she claims that she disputed the overstated claim in question,
but that the New York Times went ahead and published it anyway.
And to quote that article briefly,
So far, that's exactly what has happened.
And that's an interesting article, so I'll leave a link to that below if you want to check it out.
So that's rather unfortunate, isn't it?
Aside from that, allow me to briefly poke a false dichotomy here and bring up class.
And I say false dichotomy because sadly, in certain circles of the internet,
any mention of class during a discussion of race will see a few accusations of class reductionism thrown around.
And indeed, any mention of race during a discussion of class will see a few accusations of race reductionism thrown around.
And the answer to this has always been, and always will be,
that both issues are inextricably interlinked and need to be both given time and understood together.
Now, most people understand that idea, I trust.
So, with that in mind, America wasn't a democracy until black Americans made it one.
Now, this implies America wasn't a democracy at some point in the past, but it is now.
But is it really?
You know, it wasn't when black people and other groups were entirely prohibited from participation, of course,
but if we're using people's inability to participate in democracy to declare America to not be a democracy,
then it still isn't today.
Many people still can't participate, and even for those who can,
their level of participation in the political process is dictated directly by their wealth and position within the economic system.
Black people have the right to vote, which is great, but there are a hundred ways that vote can be stolen from them.
Perfectly legally, too, with gerrymandering, various forms of voter suppression,
the enormous amount of money influencing politics, and so on.
The problem is that the principles of democracy run counter to the principles of capitalism.
And this is the main reason I personally find the 1619 Project to be rather disappointing.
When it comes time to criticize capitalism, it doesn't go far enough.
Another essay in the 1619 Project is titled,
American Capitalism is Brutal, You Can Trace That to the Plantation.
And that essay does as it says, it looks at modern economic inequality and injustices,
and finds roots or comparisons for those things in the practices of the slave trade.
The essay highlights that it wasn't only racism motivating the actions of the slave owners,
there were systemic financial incentives for a lot of what they were doing.
So this all sounds fine on the surface, right?
The problem for me is that the essay pulls up short of really condemning capitalism.
American capitalism is called a racist capitalism, or low-road capitalism,
and is compared unfavorably to other capitalist countries that have better workers' rights,
higher wages, more union representation, and so on.
And this is just taking too narrow a view of capitalism, in my opinion.
It implies that what needs to happen is for America to cast off its racism
and take the high road in capitalism, ensuring workers get better rights and higher wages and all that.
Which, fair enough, it does. That does need to happen.
But that won't solve the issues at the heart of capitalism.
You can make things temporarily and locally nicer under capitalism.
There are capitalist countries, as the essay points out, with better workers' rights than America,
but they're not operating in a vacuum.
They're part of a global capitalist system, and whatever rights they've secured within their own borders,
they're still benefiting from being part of an exploitative system that denies those rights to people in other places.
Unfortunately, I'll have to shelve my lefty gripes about the shortcomings of the 1619 project for the rest of the video.
Because while I might wish that the wider argument taking place was between two groups of non-racists
who only disagree on the issue of capitalism, there is someone else at the table here.
And annoyingly, their position distorts the boundaries of the conversation somewhat.
And because of that, I will concede that whatever my problems with the project,
when we consider the traditional way American history was, or still is often taught,
you know, comprising mostly of uncritical veneration of a bunch of white slave owners,
efforts to re-examine American history to center the impact of slavery are sorely needed, clearly.
In an interview with Chris Wallace on Fox News last year,
then-President Trump brought up the 1619 project when asked about previous statements of his
indicating he thinks that schools are teaching students to hate their country.
So Wallace asked,
"'You said our children are taught in school to hate our country. Where do you see that?'
To which Trump replied,
"'I just look at... I look at school. I watch, I read, look at the stuff. Now they want to change.'
1492. Columbus discovered America.
You know, we grew up. You grew up. We all did. We all grew up.
That's what we learned. Now they want to make it the 1619 project.
They... Where did that come from? What does it represent? I don't even know, so...
And Wallace points out,
To which Trump responds,
Very bizarre statements there.
I'm not sure what we can learn from that,
apart from the fact that the 1619 project is clearly occupying space
in what we can charitably refer to as the president's mind.
At a speech on October 6th of last year when Trump was talking about the creation of the 1776 commission,
he also discussed the 1619 report,
saying it seeks to reframe our nation's history around the idea that the United States is not an exceptional country,
but an evil one.
And the 1776 report itself also mentions the 1619 report directly,
saying the journalists behind it have turned to bitterness and judgment.
So this report is very much the conservative rejoinder to the 1619 project's centering of slavery.
It's a response to what they see as an undermining of American exceptionalism.
The White House press release announcing the release of the report reads as follows,
The 1776 commission, comprised of some of America's most distinguished scholars and historians,
has released a report presenting a definitive chronicle of the American founding,
a powerful description of the effect the principles of the Declaration of Independence have had on this nation's history,
and a dispositive rebuttal of reckless re-education attempts that seek to reframe American history
around the idea that the United States is not an exceptional country, but an evil one.
So that's the same phrase about America being an exceptional country as in Trump's speech there.
Now, of course, anyone who points to the principles of America's founders as the source of American exceptionalism
opens themselves up to the counterargument,
well, what about slavery?
You know, it's all well and good for America's founding fathers to talk about freedom and inalienable rights
and all men being created equal,
but at the same time, they owned humans.
They bought and sold and profited from and tortured slaves.
And there's really no getting away from this contradiction.
After its introduction, the first section of the 1776 report is titled The Meaning of the Declaration,
and that states,
But they owned slaves.
You know, there's no escaping that.
Any praise for America's founding principles has to be done in the abstract,
while acknowledging that in reality they were selectively applied,
and for a great many people living in the United States for a very long time, practically, they were a hypocritical lie.
Anyone can talk about freedom and equality,
but those words are gonna ring a bit hollow coming from someone who keeps other humans in literal chains.
Now, conservatives, such as those behind the 1776 report, don't really like slavery being mentioned in this context.
This is where a lot of the talk about kids being taught to hate their country comes from, right?
Slavery is evil. The United States did slavery. Therefore, the United States is evil.
So to put ourselves in the shoes of the authors of the 1776 report here,
how do we deal with this?
How do we tell the story of America's founding in a patriotic, celebratory way,
without getting bogged down in discussions about the evils of slavery?
Well, what we do is, we just don't mention slavery at all.
Throughout their introduction and two opening sections concerning the founding of America,
there are zero mentions of slavery or the slave trade in the text.
They talk about the framers of the Constitution seeking to secure equal natural rights and prevent the re-emergence of tyranny,
but equal natural rights for who, though?
They mention the people's participation in the political process without mentioning that by people.
They do not mean the people, as in the people who lived there.
They mean the white people, or more often, just the property-owning white men.
If the 1619 Project was a centering of slavery in the American story, this is a de-centering of slavery, to put it mildly.
In order to tell a patriotic version of America's founding, slavery is simply excised from the history.
In the American exceptionalism version of events, slavery is kicked under the rug.
But the authors of the report do have to deal with the slavery issue.
They realize they can't get away with not mentioning it at all.
So having removed slavery from the history of America's founding,
they relegate it to a section of the report titled,
Challenges to America's Principles,
where it's listed alongside things like fascism and communism.
Slavery is thus re-categorized as an antagonizing foreign force to be defeated by America,
rather than an inherent part of America.
Having cordoned off slavery from the rest of American history,
the 1776 report sets about attempting to, well, make excuses for it.
And these excuses are very revealing.
They lead by saying,
than the exception throughout human history.
So, this is the first excuse.
Slavery was not a uniquely American evil, so slavery is evil to start with.
That's good, they got that far at least.
But it's not unique to America.
Slavery is more the rule than the exception.
Or put another way, American slavery was unexceptional.
Now this excuse reveals why they had to separate out slavery from the broader history of the American founding,
because it blows a massive hole in their argument for American exceptionalism.
And this should go without saying really, but if you're trying to argue for America being exceptional,
you can't then excuse its flaws by claiming it is unexceptional.
That's trying to have it both ways.
America's good qualities are used to indicate it is special and unique and exceptional,
while its bad qualities are used to indicate nothing.
They're merely products of the time, so we can excuse those.
The report at one point states all the good things we see around us,
from the physical infrastructure, to our high standards of living, to our exceptional freedoms,
are direct results of America's unity, stability, and justice.
All of which in turn rest on the bedrock of our founding principles.
So it's saying the good things, and only the good things that Americans see today,
are directly traceable to its founding.
But the report announces the 1619 Project for doing what is close to the mirror of this,
claiming that many of America's present inequalities and flaws also have roots in its early history.
So we have to ask, why is this?
Why is it that only America's positive qualities are able to be traced from its history in this way?
That's rather convenient, isn't it?
The report goes on to highlight certain of the founders anti-slavery sentiments,
and casts their compromises with slavery as merely a practical political move.
But this is only telling part of the story.
We can't defend the founders as a group by saying that certain individuals personally disagreed with slavery
and merely compromised with it, because we have to ask, who were they compromising with?
They're not arguing with aliens threatening to blow up the Earth unless the United States keeps the slave trade, are they?
They were making compromises with other slave owning and slave trade supporting founders.
And by compromises here, I mean they made real legal compromises.
One provision in the Constitution at the time of its ratification forbade any restriction of the importation of slaves for 20 years.
Certain founders disagreed with the slave trade, that is true.
But as a group, they not only kept it, they protected it.
The report states,
What history went on to show was that no durable union could continue to exist with those compromises.
Now the authors of the 1776 report might still have a point about this American exceptionalism stuff
if America had been unique in its abolition of slavery or the slave trade,
or maybe it was particularly early to abolish it or something.
But it wasn't, was it?
The report says,
Then why, we might ask, did the United States take longer to legally outlaw the slave trade and slavery
than the tyrannical British Empire?
Surely America's exceptional founding principles of freedom and equality
should have meant they were able to outlaw slavery before the Empire ruled by a monarch.
Rarely there is just no getting around the contradiction at the heart of the American founding.
The founders proclaimed freedom and equality, while at the same time keeping other people in slavery.
Whatever their individual opinions about the slave trade,
whatever the political situation at the time, the sum of their actions led to a continuance of a system of slavery.
That's simply the truth.
It can't be ignored or excused, and it can't be removed from the story.
So let's step back for a second and ask, what is actually the issue here?
What's the problem with centering slavery for the authors of the 1776 report?
Well, it's to do, I think, with how they view the purpose of historical education.
We shouldn't be learning from history in totality, with its moral complexities, its good and bad parts,
understanding its participants as humans with human flaws and failings.
What we should be doing is looking to history for patriotic and moral instruction,
understanding its participants as either heroes to be emulated or villains to be defeated.
This is history as parable. We're supposed to be being shown how best to live.
And this is why conservatives often conflate discussions of their country's historical crimes with an attack upon history in general.
Of course, you might say that if those crimes have gone underreported or unexplored,
then bringing them into the spotlight is unarguably broadening the history and deepening our understanding of it.
But you'd only say that if you were actually interested in learning from history, instead of looking to it as a source of patriotism.
We teach children about our historical role models so that they love their country.
By highlighting their crimes or failings, you thus must want children to hate their country.
In the section Teaching America, the report states,
Educators must convey a sense of enlightened patriotism that equips each generation with a knowledge of America's founding principles,
a deep reverence for their liberties, and a profound love of their country.
And I'd like to compare that with another quote from later in the same section when they say,
States and school districts should reject any curriculum that promotes one-sided partisan opinions,
activist propaganda, or factional ideologies that demean America's heritage, dishonor our heroes, or deny our principles.
You might think this contradicts, right?
Educators should not teach one-sided partisan opinions, but must teach children to be patriotic and love their country.
That doesn't make sense, does it? Because those are one-sided opinions.
But on closer examination, this is not a contradiction. It's phrased very specifically.
Schools should reject any curriculum that promotes one-sided partisan opinions, activist propaganda, or factional ideologies that demean America's heritage.
Because, of course, one-sided partisan opinions that celebrate America's heritage, those are fine.
What we don't want is biased one-sided opinions saying America is bad, but biased one-sided opinions saying America is good.
Well, brilliant.
Now, before we move on, I just want to highlight one important thing about this mindset of looking to history as a source of patriotism,
and it's that the people who think like this assume others do too.
To them, we all think America's supposed greatness is rooted in its founding principles and the characteristics of its founders.
It's just that some of us want to use that information for evil.
And it's only a short jump from where we're at right now to get into the real conspiracy theorizing.
These attempts to undermine and destroy American society by teaching people about history,
what if they're not simply the actions of some lone wolf America-hating academic types?
What if it's an organized conspiracy?
Appendix 3 of the 1776 report is titled Created Equal or Identity Politics,
and that contains a subsection titled Intellectual Origins of Identity Politics,
and that shares the conspiracy theory that is cultural Marxism.
So, cultural Marxism, just quoting Wikipedia here for brevity,
is a far-right anti-Semitic conspiracy theory which claims Western Marxism as the basis of continuing academic and intellectual efforts to subvert Western culture.
The conspiracists claim that an elite of Marxist theorists and Frankfurt School intellectuals are subverting Western society
with a culture war that undermines the Christian values of traditionalist conservatism
and promotes decultural liberal values of the 1960s counterculture.
And the conspiracy theory is all here in the 1776 report.
They name the Frankfurt School, critical theory, intellectuals Antonio Gramsci and Herbert Marcuse,
the division of society into oppressed and oppressor groups,
the creation of a counterculture that seeks to destroy the established culture, and so on.
Now, to the uninitiated, this might seem like run-of-the-mill grumpy old man complaining, right?
Society is changing in a way that for conservatives, like those behind this report, doesn't make sense.
They think America and Americans are exceptional.
So when Americans do things they consider unexceptional, or un-American,
usually things like wanting a proper healthcare system, this doesn't make sense to them.
This couldn't be arising from within our own society.
This has to be some sort of organized outside antagonist force.
Kids these days are more interested in listening to the rap music than reading the Constitution.
Am I so out of touch? No, it's cultural Marxist brainwashing or something.
But this is not just idle complaining.
This is real far-right Nazi stuff, just with a few euphemisms here and there.
One reason that the Wikipedia article there calls this an anti-Semitic conspiracy theory
is that often cultural Marxists are criticized simply as a stand-in for Jewish people.
And, of course, the Nazi party themselves had their own variant of the cultural Marxist conspiracy theory,
which they called cultural Bolshevism.
When I read the intellectual origins of identity politics, it brought to mind something else that I'd read before,
and that's the historical roots of political correctness,
which is another introduction to the cultural Marxist conspiracy theory,
and a strikingly similar piece of writing right down to the title.
And if we look at the historical roots of political correctness, it's all here again.
We've got the Frankfurt School, there's critical theory,
Antonio Gramsci and Herbert Marcuse, the division of society into oppressed and oppressor groups,
the creation of a counterculture, and so on again.
This passage is taken from the manifesto written by Anders Behring Breivik,
the Norwegian far-right terrorist who killed 77 people in 2011.
That manifesto is titled A European Declaration of Independence.
Now, this should be worrisome, right?
That the White House website is publishing blatant white supremacist propaganda.
Usually, it only publishes veiled white supremacist propaganda.
And I want to make two points about this.
Firstly, this sort of thing is one reason why the more direct academic fact-checking debunking route
doesn't hit very hard with the sort of audience which is the target for this rubbish.
You know, of course those academics and historians are gonna say the report is wrong on the facts.
They're all part of a cultural Marxist conspiracy.
Universities in the United States are often today hotbeds of anti-Americanism, libel, and censorship, the report says.
We see it anticipates an academic rebuttal, and so pre-defends itself by attempting to discredit the rebuttas
by branding them liars.
You know, they're just liars. You can't listen to what they say.
They're engaged in a conspiracy to destroy Western civilization, after all.
They'll say anything, so you can't listen to them. Only listen to me.
This is also, of course, part of a broader trend of conservative anti-intellectualism in general,
intended to brand academics and experts, you know, people who might know what they're talking about, as merely partisan activists.
Their proximity to whichever topic is in question, instead of conveying experience, is used as evidence for bias.
And taking this worldview to its logical conclusion, the most trustworthy person is therefore the person who knows least of all, right?
But the 1776 report doesn't just treat academics in this manner.
I want to move on now and have a think about the way in which the report treats black people.
The first essay of the 1619 project is broadly about the lingering effects of slavery and systemic racism
and black people's contributions to civil rights over the years and so on,
but it's also about how contemporary black people relate to that history, right?
The author talks about her own family's experiences living with racism and segregation,
and her own relationship to American history and patriotism.
And for the 1776 report, this represents a problem.
Now, of course, when American history is taught to a group of American children,
some of those children are inevitably going to recognize that the history contains people with the same skin color as them,
being bought and sold and enslaved for no other reason than having the same skin color as them.
Which, of course, means they, as a group, are going to relate to that history differently, right?
They're going to have a different understanding to the white majority,
who see their own skin color represented by the historical figures who, they're often being taught,
were brave and wise and heroic and also owned other people.
Which is a whole problem in itself, but regardless, my point is that the different groups are going to relate to the history in different ways.
This is, for the authors of the 1776 report, a question of national unity.
Because Americans are not supposed to be having different interpretations of America's history,
they're all supposed to understand it in the same way.
Now, of course, the report acts as if group identities are only ever invented and foisted on people
by cultural Marxists and partisan activist academics and so on.
They have no understanding of structural systemic racism.
For them, racism worthy of being organized against ended in the 1960s with the passing of the Civil Rights Act.
But we all know it didn't.
You can teach a purely patriotic version of American history to all children equally, whatever their background,
but when those children encounter the labor market, or have experiences with the police,
or try to buy a house, or any one of a hundred other examples like this,
they're going to be treated differently, based in part on those same group distinctions
that once branded some people as slaves and not others.
However colorblind we pretend society is now that different racial groups are technically legally equal,
the status quo sees these group identities and they are treated differently.
The divisions in American society are arising from inequalities inside American society,
not being injected by some outside force.
We see here the other side of the coin to the antisemitism of the Cultural Marxist Conspiracy Theory,
because it requires not just imagined Jewish manipulators,
but also an American black population that is incapable of properly identifying shared injustices.
It betrays a tremendous mistrust of black people to dismiss their reactions to their own experiences
as mere inventions of outside agitators.
Anyway, all that aside, how does the 1776 report, with its singular, pointedly not open to interpretation version of American history,
deal with black people?
Because as the 1619 report highlights, black people have often been at the forefront of pushes for social change in the United States,
and thus have often been some of the most vocal critics of America's failings.
And the report deals with this by playing a rhetorical trick.
Let's first talk about their presentation of Martin Luther King Jr.
They include pictures of King, of course, nice big space-filling pictures,
but they also quote him, such as here when they include an excerpt from his I Have a Dream speech
in which King praises the magnificent words of the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence.
And they quote this passage again in the section titled Racism and Identity Politics
when talking about the reforms brought about by the Civil Rights Movement.
But all is not well.
It seemed, finally, that America's nearly two-century effort to realize fully the principles of the Declaration had reached a culmination.
But the heady spirit of the original Civil Rights Movement, whose leaders forcefully quoted the Declaration of Independence,
the Constitution, and the rhetoric of the founders and of Lincoln, proved to be short-lived.
The Civil Rights Movement was almost immediately turned to programs that ran counter to the lofty ideals of the founders.
The ideas that drove this change had been growing in America for decades,
and they distorted many areas of policy in the half-century that followed.
Among the distortions was the abandonment of non-discrimination and equal opportunity in favor of group rights,
not unlike those advanced by Calhoun.
That's John C. Calhoun, 7th Vice President of the United States and vocal supporter of slavery there, and his followers.
The justification for reversing the promise of colorblind civil rights was that past discrimination requires present effort,
or affirmative action in the form of preferential treatment to overcome longer crude inequalities.
And all this means that identity politics makes it less likely that racial reconciliation and healing can be attained
by pursuing Martin Luther King Jr.'s dream for America.
So, oh no, Civil Rights Movement, you were doing so well, weren't you? But then you went and took it too far.
How can we attain Martin Luther King's dream for America if you go off pushing for wacky ideas like affirmative action?
Certainly, Martin Luther King wouldn't have supported that, right?
However, a year after his I Have a Dream speech, King wrote the following.
Whenever this issue of compensatory or preferential treatment for the Negro is raised, some of our friends recoil in horror.
The Negro should be granted equality, they agree, but he should ask for nothing more.
On the surface, this appears reasonable, but it is not realistic.
For it is obvious that if a man enters the starting line of a race 300 years after another man,
the first would have to perform some incredible feat in order to catch up.
King is elsewhere quoted as saying,
And in 1965, King was interviewed by writer Alex Haley,
who, referring to King's support for a jobs program for young black people, asked him,
Indeed. Can any fair-minded citizen deny that the Negro has been deprived?
Few people reflect that for two centuries the Negro was enslaved and robbed of any wages,
potential accrued wealth which would have been the legacy of his descendants.
All of America's wealth today could not adequately compensate its Negroes for his centuries of exploitation and humiliation.
It is an economic fact that a program such as I propose would certainly cost far less than any computation of two centuries of unpaid wages,
plus accumulated interest.
So, what's going on here then?
The authors of the 1776 report appear to be misrepresenting Martin Luther King Jr.'s opinions,
if you can believe such a thing.
Now, I'd like to make clear here that I have not caught the authors of the 1776 report making an unwitting mistake here.
They know exactly who King was and what his opinions were.
They know he supported affirmative action, they know he was a vocal critic of capitalism,
they know he supported a radical redistribution of economic power, and they hate him for that.
They absolutely despise the man.
But conservatives also know that King is today a broadly popular and beloved figure.
So, a frontal assault, the kind to which they would subject King if he were alive today,
you know, calling him a traitorous communist cultural Marxist and all that, would backfire.
So, the conservative tactic with regards to King is one of selective quotation.
They overemphasize a single line from one of his speeches and then they pretend that's all he ever said.
If you got all your information about Martin Luther King Jr. from this report,
you'd think he popped into existence in 1963 to say racism sure is bad and then he just fell off the earth or something.
Now, the aim of this tactic is twofold. Firstly, it defangs King, right?
It makes him into a simplistic storybook character who just quotes the founding fathers and says it's bad to be racist,
and that's all he does.
But the other aim here is to use this strawman version of King as a standard against which other black people can be judged negatively.
The point of praising King before going on to criticize, for instance, those who support affirmative action programs,
is to give the impression that King would not support affirmative action programs.
Of course, the real Martin Luther King Jr. did support affirmative action programs, but that doesn't matter.
We're not talking about him. We're talking about storybook Martin Luther King Jr.,
and he wouldn't support affirmative action programs.
He would quote the founding fathers and say it was bad to be racist, and that's all he would do.
This is not a tactic invented by the 1776 reports I'd like to make clear, lest I give the impression they're somehow being inventive in their lies.
This is an old conservative tactic for dealing with the radical activist Martin Luther King Jr.
who talked about economic equality and criticized American imperialism and was arrested and jailed for his opinions.
They just make a new Martin Luther King Jr. at the head of a toothless civil rights movement
which saw as its final goal legal equality, but demanded nothing further.
Martin Luther King Jr. is not the only black person in the 1776 report to get this treatment.
They also quote Frederick Douglass. They close out the main text of the report with a quote from Frederick Douglass, actually, and that reads as follows.
The Declaration of Independence is the ring bolt to the chain of your nation's destiny, so indeed I regard it.
The principles contained in that instrument are saving principles.
Stand by those principles, be true to them on all occasions, in all places, against all foes, and at whatever cost.
So that's another black social reformer singing the praises of the Declaration of Independence completely out of context.
No further analysis needed, right?
Frederick Douglass said the Declaration of Independence was good.
That's it. That's the end of the point.
But allow me to quote from the same speech as the 1776 report pulled that quote from.
So this is an abridged version of a speech by Douglass titled, What to the Slave is the Fourth of July.
Now, I'm not going to be able to do this justice, obviously, but here we go.
So, after praising the Declaration of Independence and its principles, Douglass goes on to say,
Fellow citizens, pardon me, allow me to ask, why am I called upon to speak here today?
What have I, or those I represent, to do with your national independence?
Are the great principles of political freedom and of natural justice embodied in that Declaration of Independence extended to us?
Would to God, both for your sakes and ours, that an affirmative answer could be truthfully returned to these questions?
But such is not the state of the case. I say it with a sad sense of the disparity between us.
I am not included within the pale of this glorious anniversary.
Your high independence only reveals the immeasurable distance between us.
The blessings in which you this day rejoice are not enjoyed in common.
The rich inheritance of justice, liberty, prosperity, and independence bequeathed by your fathers is shared by you, not by me.
This Fourth of July is yours, not mine.
I shall see this day and its popular characteristics from the slave's point of view.
Standing there, identified with the American bondman, making his wrongs mine,
I do not hesitate to declare with all my soul that the character and conduct of this nation never looked blacker to me than on this Fourth of July.
Whether we turn to the declarations of the past or to the professions of the present, the conduct of the nation seems equally hideous and revolting.
America is false to the past, false to the present, and solemnly binds herself to be false to the future.
What to the American slave is your Fourth of July?
I answer, a day that reveals to him, more than all other days in the year, the gross injustice and cruelty to which he is the constant victim.
To him, your celebration is a sham, your boasted liberty an unholy license, your national greatness, swelling vanity,
your sounds of rejoicing are empty and heartless, your denunciations of tyrants, brass-fronted impudence,
your shouts of liberty and equality, hollow mockery, your prayers and hymns, your sermons and thanksgivings,
with all your religious parade and solemnity, are to him me a bombast, fraud, deception, impiety, and hypocrisy,
a thin veil to cover up crimes which would disgrace a nation of savages.
There is not a nation on the earth guilty of practices more shocking and bloody than are the people of these United States at this very hour.
Go where you may, search where you will, roam through all the monarchies and despotisms of the old world,
travel through South America, search out every abuse, and when you have found the last, lay your facts by the side of the everyday practices of this nation,
and you will say with me that for revolting barbarity and shameless hypocrisy, America reigns without a rival.
Fellow citizens, I will not enlarge further on your national inconsistencies.
The existence of slavery in this country brands your republicanism as a sham, your humanity as a base pretense, and your Christianity as a lie.
Cor blimey, he really gave it to them, didn't he?
So, what's my point here? Well, though it was set up to counter the claim that the United States is not an exceptional country, but an evil one,
the 1776 report closes out with a quote from a speech in which the speaker very forcefully and repeatedly declares the United States to be the most evil place in the whole world.
Which is rather funny, isn't it?
But again, this is not a mistake.
Both King and Douglas praised America's founding principles, but then went on to say that America was betraying those principles, not living up to them, proving them to be practically lies.
The 1776 report snips off the criticism and presents only the praise.
Now, we could do the same thing to the 1619 report, which also praises America's principles prior to criticizing it for not living up to them.
For instance, here's a quote taken out of context here.
In June 1776, Thomas Jefferson sat at his portable writing desk in a rented room in Philadelphia and penned these words.
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
For the last 243 years, this fierce assertion of the fundamental and natural rights of humankind to freedom and self-governance has defined our global reputation as a land of liberty.
So, there we go.
Stripped of all context, of all the following criticism, of the accusation that while these ideals are noble in spirit, they are not being delivered upon,
stripped of that, these words now appear only as mindless celebration of the United States and its founding principles.
This is precisely what was done to the speeches of King and Douglas.
It turns out that what conservatives like those behind the 1776 report most appreciate about figures like Martin Luther King Jr. and Frederick Douglas
is that they're dead, and cannot defend themselves when their words and ideas are misappropriated.
In life, they criticized America, but they're dead now, and therefore they can't correct us when we cherry-pick lines out of their speeches.
So, we thus make them safe. We reduce them to being only reciters of white men's words.
Now, the authors of the 1619 Project are alive, and their arguments are contemporary. Their criticisms must be met.
The authors of the 1776 report cannot disagree that the institution of slavery was evil and unacceptable and counter to America's supposed ideals, which is all true,
but they cannot accept this criticism because of where it's coming from. Because it's coming from black people.
To the authors of this report, America's crimes, if they are to be acknowledged at all, are to be acknowledged by white men.
When the time comes, not pointed out by black people, speaking out of turn.
What matters here is white control of the conversation.
If living black people criticize America, we compare them unfavorably to the mythological cartoon version of figures like King and Douglas,
the respectable black people who we say did it right, after we've given them a whitewashing, that is.
By picking and choosing which black people have legitimate things to say, and who are merely ideological, motivated partisan activists,
we're making the claim that it is the right of white people to decide this.
American history is a white man's story. We insist black people can observe and mouth along with the words if they like,
but they are not allowed to complain, and they're certainly not allowed to direct.
After they die, we may graciously acknowledge that they had some part in the story, but only because they were inspired by the ideas of white men.
Now, of course, the big win for the 1776 report is that they got this rubbish published at all.
Trump gave them a platform to share their racist conspiracy nonsense, and they used it.
Their report was quickly discredited and deleted, but it will always have been published on the White House website,
and that gives their arguments a seriously undue legitimacy.
The report was quickly deleted, sure, but that it existed at all means its particular brand of patriotic education can serve as a blueprint.
Texas lawmaker unveils plans for 1836 project to commemorate state's independence from Mexico.
A Texas lawmaker has unveiled plans for a committee that would promote patriotic education across the state's schools, parks, and museums.
Rep. Tan Parker is pressing for the 1836 project, named after the year Texas achieved independence from Mexico,
according to legislation filed Monday.
The lawmaker said in a news release,
Now, I feel some sympathy with all you Americans on this one, as over here in the UK, we've recently dialed up our own particular brand of patriotic nonsense.
Our revered historical figure who must not be insulted is Winston Churchill, the man who, as we all know,
single-handedly defeated the entire military force of Nazi Germany and definitely wasn't a eugenicist and open white supremacist, oh no.
Criticisms of Churchill or the various crimes of the British Empire are met by conservatives over here in much the same way that criticisms of the American founders are met over there.
Now, I'd like not to worry about all this and see it merely as the last desperate flailings of an increasingly irrelevant conservative mindset,
just trying to pass itself on to the next generation, as people of the previous generations increasingly, well, do what all people do.
Unfortunately, I don't think that this is something that's just gonna go away by itself.
All this patriotism, nationalism, racism, and so on isn't just a generational thing, nor does it stem solely from individual flaws.
It serves an economic purpose, too.
If you're a capitalist, you want your workers to see immigrants and foreigners as competition, not as fellow workers, which is what they are.
If you can't keep people divided and unequal, they'll unite and demand equality.
So, as long as there's profit in keeping people divided, attempts to divide people will persist.
So, this stuff has to be met actively.
You can't just wait for your parents to die.
That was the point of this video, I suppose. There we go, we found it.
Thanks a lot for watching, everyone.
And as always, thank you especially to all my lovely supporters over on Patreon, some of whom should be scrolling by right now.
As always, patrons get early access to rough versions of my new videos with various mistakes in which they very helpfully point out and make fun of me for.
And I'll leave a link to my Patreon page below if you would like to check that out.
Alright, that's all from me today, folks. I'll see you next time.
