So how are you feeling, Nella?
I'm feeling great. I am so excited about our outline.
I think we're really going to nail this.
So this week, as evidenced by our single camera setup,
this is just going to be a quick little quickie update.
Yeah.
Because rather than a discussion with multicam editing,
On our snazzy smartphones.
Yeah, on our iPhones technology.
We're just doing a quick update to let everyone know the status of the project.
It's still going. We're still here.
We've actually started the writing phase, however.
We have officially hired on five people to help us write this monstrosity.
Once again, thank you all so much for everyone that submitted.
Absolutely.
I was going to email everyone like a professional,
but we're kind of overwhelmed with the amount of work we have to do
and the very few people we have to do it with.
Maybe after this project is done.
Yeah, after we're done.
It's like, yeah, I know I've been rejected.
I deduction that.
But we still appreciate you.
Allow me to reiterate that it wasn't necessarily the quality of writing.
It was the tone, and we went for a variety of scenes
that we thought people would be strong at.
So we want to thank Josh, The Mats, A and B, literally,
Marianne, and No Name.
We need to check with her to make sure.
Can we say her first name?
Yeah, for being our writers and for already being a great deal of fun.
I think we're having a lot of fun with this writing process.
Oh, yeah.
It's been fantastic so far.
And we're going to bastardize the Lovecraft missiles so much more
than we had originally intended.
Oh, man.
Also, we're going to bastardize New England.
We're going to bastardize New York City.
I have that chapter.
I can't wait to read it.
Everything is going to be so wrong yet so right.
While we're working on our fictional biography for our fictional author,
please send your suggestions for her name and hometown and backstory
and all that fun stuff totally gets in Facebook fights
with people who give her books negative reviews.
She's that lady.
Oh, well, then.
I'll keep that in mind as I'm writing.
Yeah, she's super insecure.
So this is Shakespeare.
Yeah.
This is my heart and soul.
So just so you guys are aware, this month is going to be pretty hectic for us.
The deadline for the first draft for everyone is going to be the 28th.
Yeah.
So we're hopefully going to have the first draft of it more or less done by then.
Yeah.
And we'll update next week with how we're going,
what our trials and tribulations are like writing an entire book in two weeks.
Yeah.
But we got eight people.
We got this.
Yeah.
I have a good feeling about it.
Easy.
If you can do NaNoWriMo, you can do this.
Although the homogenizing is going to be an interesting process.
So, yeah.
So, again, thanks for watching.
We'll have a real episode next week, maybe.
Probably not.
We'll see how much writing I still have to do.
Yeah.
It's a rather time-consuming process,
this creating an entire outline that everyone agrees with and is on board with.
But, yes, send us any and all suggestions at SheaApocalypse.com.
We are still taking the ones that we like
and secretly incorporating them into the outline.
Too many to name right now.
And, of course, follow us at SheaApocalypse
and my silly retweet Twitter, sexyalienbook,
which I still have not changed to SexyCthulhu.
I don't think I have.
Might as well just keep it sexyalien.
Yeah.
I mean, Cthulhu's an alien in this book.
Yeah, he's some kind of weird alien thing.
They're the aliens from the space between spaces.
Yeah, exactly.
That's right.
Because that's what's in now.
That's right.
We're those assholes.
We're making them the aliens from Indiana Jones 4.
Yeah.
That's what's in now.
Yeah.
I think.
Once we're ready to go with the book,
we'll be back with, like, real episodes
where we'll discuss stuff like cultural appropriation.
Yeah, cultural appropriation.
Because we've been reading Tiger Saga.
The Tiger Saga.
We've got some stuff to talk about, guys.
We have words.
Such words.
Such words.
White people.
Which words?
She could study tigers in college.
No, that would require her knowing things and being active.
But then she realizes how much she hates biology,
and she can't do that.
Girls don't do science.
Yeah, so anyway.
Next week.
Or not next week.
Eventually.
We'll get to fun things like cultural appropriation,
more gender studies.
We'll hopefully be able to talk to some industry people.
Yeah.
And maybe we'll go through the querying process.
And get to the bottom of why this shit is allowed.
I don't even think it's the authors anymore.
Why do people like?
No, I mean, it's too homogenous for it to be, like, everyone.
Yeah.
It's all the same.
It's all the same.
It's all the same.
Team Paranormal on this.
We need to talk to some people, maybe over drinks.
Yeah.
Like, sit them down, get them really drunk,
and then pick their brains.
Yeah, we're going to lure some publishers.
Make them spill their secrets.
Yeah.
Lure people with promise of alcohol,
and trap them in a web of whys.
Whys.
A web of whys.
Cheers, y'all.
