Let's say you want to become Pope, head of the Catholic Church and shepherd to over 1
billion faithful.
What requirements must you have for this lofty position?
First, be a Catholic and second, be a man.
Which seems a little thin and while it's technically possible for a regular Sunday Catholic to
become Pope, the last time this happened was essentially never because becoming Pope isn't
like becoming president.
You can't just run for office.
Selecting the Pope is an inside job and the men who do it are the cardinals and while
in theory they can select any Catholic man to become Pope, in practice they prefer to
elevate one of their own.
The last time a non-cardinal became Pope was more than 600 years ago so while it isn't
an official requirement, it's an unofficial official requirement.
Thus in order to become Pope you'll first need to be a cardinal and to do that you need
to start climbing the Catholic corporate ladder.
Step 1.
Become a priest.
Unlike some churches where you can just fill out a form online and poof, ordained, the
Catholic Church treats becoming a priest as a real, you-need-training profession.
So you're going to require a lot of education, usually a college degree in Catholic philosophy
and then a masters in divinity.
In addition to your educational qualifications you must also be a man unmarried and willing
to remain celibate.
If you meet these requirements and have been working with the church then you can be officially
ordained as a priest which basically means you get to run a Catholic Church or work with
another priest who does.
But you want to move onward and to do that you need to take the job of the man who just
made you a priest.
Step 2.
Become a bishop.
Bishops are a much more select group.
While there are about 400,000 Catholic priests worldwide there are only about 5,000 bishops.
While priests get churches, bishops get cathedrals from which they oversee a number of local
churches.
To advance your career you must wait for a bishop in your area to be forced into retirement
at age 75 or die sooner than that freeing up space for you.
But you can't just apply because there's already a secret list of potential bishops that's
updated every three years based on who the current bishops in your area think would make
a good replacement for one of their own.
To be on that list, in addition to the obvious requirement of being a pious person, you should
also be at least 35 years old, have been a priest for at least 5 years and have a doctorate
in theology or equivalent.
Assuming you're all these things your name may or may not be on the secret list.
The local bishops then give that list to the Pope's ambassador for your country known as
the Apostolic Nuncio.
The Nuncio picks three priests from the list, does in-depth research on them, conducts interviews
and selects the one he thinks is best.
But it's not over because the Nuncio sends his report to Vatican City and the Congress
of Bishops who work there reviewing potential appointments from around the world.
If the Congress of Bishops doesn't like any of the three candidates they can tell the
Nuncio to start over, returning to the list, picking another three candidates, doing more
research, more interviews and sending off their results.
When the Congress of Bishops is happy with one of the Nuncio's candidates, that name
is given to the Pope who can reject the candidate and start the whole process over.
It shouldn't be a surprise that from vacancy to a bishop's replacement can take months
and on occasion years.
But assuming a bishop in your area retired or died at the right time and you were on
the secret list of good priests and the Nuncio picked you and you made it through his interview
and the Congress of Bishops approved you and the Pope didn't veto you, poof, now you're
a bishop.
But you're still not on top.
The penultimate promotion is step number three.
Become a cardinal.
Despite the fancy name and snazzy red outfits to match, cardinals are not the bosses of
bishops.
They are bishops just with an additional title and additional responsibilities, the most
notable of which is electing the new pope.
The only way to become a cardinal is to get the current pope to appoint you as one.
And of the 5,000 bishops, only about 200 are ever cardinals.
But let's say your ambition doesn't go unnoticed by the pope and he makes you a cardinal.
Now it's time to play the waiting game for his death or retirement.
And with popes, death is vastly more likely.
And either happens, the cardinals under the age of 80 are brought to Vatican City where
they are isolated from the outside world, presumably by taking away their cell phones
and tablets and carrier pigeons.
Once sequestered, the election of a new pope can begin.
These elections are never exactly the same because the ex-pope leaves instructions on
how he wants his replacements to be picked but in general it works like this.
Four times a day the cardinals go to the Sistine Chapel to vote and to become pope one of them
must get a two-thirds majority.
There's a big dose of mustn't be too hasty here as the cardinals don't just raise their
hands or use a modern preferential voting system but instead write down one name on
a piece of paper, stand before the altar and say a long latin phrase before officially
casting the ballot.
Once all the cardinals have done this, the votes are counted and then burned.
This is why TV news stations covering the election of pope use super modern HD live
streaming cameras to look at a chimney.
If the smoke is black, no new pope.
The high victory threshold and tediously slow voting process is why it takes so long to
elect a pope.
It's usually at least two weeks of voting, four times a day, six days a week with one
day a week reserved for prayer but the record length is three years.
Assuming you eventually win the support of your fellow cardinals you have one final thing
to do before becoming pope.
Pick yourself a new name.
There's no formal rule and you can name yourself anything you like but it's tradition to take
the name of a previous pope.
Upon the acceptance of your new name the final ballots are burned clean to make the smoke
turn white and announce to the world that a new pope has been selected.
So that's the career path.
Be born into the right half of the population, become one of a billion Catholics, then one
of four hundred thousand priests, then one of five thousand bishops, then one of two
hundred cardinals, wait for the current pope to die or retire and convince two-thirds of
your fellow cardinals to select you as the one, the only pope.
