By now you probably know what a speedrun is already.
It's where players commit to beating a game as fast as possible.
On the surface, it's a bit silly.
People sitting down with one game, playing it over and over,
dedicating immense time and effort to learning its ins and outs
and learning skills that probably aren't all that helpful anywhere else.
And yet, somehow, the experience of taking part in
or even watching someone try to speedrun a game
is exhilarating and amazing and just fun,
and speedruns of some games frequently get millions of views.
This clearly matters to a lot of people,
so there's probably a reason why,
and I was having trouble scratching out the reasons why,
so I arrived at the obvious solution of writing a YouTube video about it.
Speedrunning is really fun to watch,
and stories about speedrunning are consistently fascinating,
and I really want to talk about why,
and no one's managed to stop me so far.
["Souls"]
It's generally accepted that the Souls series is pretty difficult,
and they are, at least for beginners,
because the games are generally not great at teaching you how to really grasp playing them.
I've heard there's already a video out there somewhere
that drones on and on for way too long trying to explain this,
so we'll ignore that here.
This difficulty is the prime reason why speedruns of games in this series
are so entertaining to watch.
Owing to the games' inaccessibility
and the time investment required to get good, as it were,
watching someone blast through them is just plain fun.
What's interesting in a more in-depth way about speedruns, though,
is seeing how they develop over time,
and Dark Souls is a perfect example of why.
Part 1.
Development.
The earliest speedrun on record at speedruns.com,
a fantastic resource, by the way, for Dark Souls,
is by Japanese runner Twilight.
In 2011, a lot less was known about how Dark Souls really ticked,
and there was yet to be much of a community
to help pick away at all the possible fastest approaches to the game,
so Twilight's run consists largely of combining general tricks
that were widely known early on for making the game easier or faster.
For example, in Dark Souls, there are multiple different starting classes
with their own stats, starting items, and abilities.
While some do have unique advantages,
the Pyromancer starts with the ability to throw fireballs,
something none of the others can access for quite a while,
so it's usually the one recommended to new players
because if they're having trouble fighting,
they can throw fire on people.
I mean, come on. So Twilight picks them.
It's not really a surprise. It's kind of the obvious choice
if you were to think about how to speedrun this game
if you played it a few times.
The next big choice is the starting gift.
Players can choose something extra to start the game with
from a list at character creation.
Normally in Dark Souls, early on to continue deeper into the game,
players have to go through a fairly tough area,
fight a difficult boss to get a key to another difficult area,
then fight another boss there to progress through
to another difficult area called Blighttown,
which leads down to another boss,
which is guarding a bell you need to ring
to progress the game,
but for, uh, reasons,
the developers made one of the starting items
players can choose from a key
that unlocks a gate in the starting area,
which skips past two of those bosses
right into the lower part of Blighttown,
so it's pretty clear what item a speedrunner
would want to start with here.
It's just the most obviously fast and helpful choice.
I mean, look at the other ones.
Binoculars, a rubbish ring,
a n-n-a more rubbish ring,
pendant, trinket, no effect,
black firebombs?
What a garbage option.
Why would anyone ever pick that?
I don't know. I guess they're pretty good.
I mean, they're more deadly than STD bomb.
What? Another initially obvious trick for speedrunning
involves this drake that turns up early on
and hangs out up here.
Getting a decent weapon in this game
usually takes some time,
but once you get to this big scary boy,
one recommended way for new players to get an advantage
so they don't have too hard a time starting out
is to sit in a safe place and spam arrows at its tail
until it breaks off, giving you this sword.
The drake sword deals a ridiculous amount of damage
for the place in the game where you can get it.
It drops off in its usefulness quite quickly,
but for early players,
it's just a fantastic weapon to pick up,
but instead of wasting time and arrows,
of which they had neither,
Twilight simply dodged behind it
when it jumped down and cut its tail off
and then ran to the next area.
This is one of the most cathartic things
you can see in a speedrun.
You know, you spend a bunch of time dying to its fire
or getting kicked to death,
and then you see someone else just steal its tail
and run away with it
and proceed to beat people to death with it
for the rest of the game.
It's great.
A lot of Twilight's early run
consists of playing the game the way one normally would,
but just doing more running and ignoring enemies.
Early runs like this play the game basically as normal,
but very quickly and precisely
doing the most obviously easy and fast moves.
Twilight burns all the remaining bosses
with their hot, hot hands
and grabs enough humanity
that they can feed it to the Daughter of Chaos
and open a shortcut past all the major fire-based bosses,
which obviously would take a long time to fight
when all your weapons are fire.
Have you ever tried actually fighting fire with fire?
I'm on a watch list now.
After a lot of running past things and killing bosses,
they gather the four Lord Souls
required to open the big door
to the remnants of Great Uncle Gwynn's
mega weekend barbecue and kill him
so someone can finally call the fire department,
and they do it in an hour and 26 minutes in in-game time.
This is an ungodly fast speed to finish Dark Souls,
but there was a lot of improvement to make.
What I think is interesting about the early runs
through the game is that they weren't just improving
on execution of the same route
or finding slightly more improved paths,
but the nature of the entire route from the very start
was still up for debate.
Nothing was set in stone,
even what type of character you chose to play as,
and it wasn't clear what the fastest way would really be,
and that's a really fun experimental period
in the development of a speed run.
This is where Dark Souls runs excel
in the spectatorship aspect.
In lots of other games, you don't have as much choice
or freedom in where to go or what sort of character to play
or what weapon to use.
There are so many other paths or decisions
that could have been made in a Souls game
that the next run threatens to be completely different,
and, well, it was.
The next world record was set three months later
and has gone on to be the longest standing world record,
lasting 13 months.
It was set by another Japanese runner, Keita.
I hope I'm pronouncing that properly.
Ke, and then it's a neon gate, so Keita.
KEITA.
All right, what's really fun about this run
was it diverged from Twilight's path immediately.
Not only do they start the game with a different class
right out of the gate,
but once they make it to Firelink Shrine
and you assume their run is gonna be similar looking
but with slight improvements,
they get up and immediately head in the opposite direction.
KEITA.
Goes to parts of the game Twilight never even sees
in their run.
Firstly, they go to the Valley of Drakes,
dodge between the drakes,
and grab the Red Tearstone Ring,
which boosts the player's damage output
by roughly 66% when they're below 20% health.
By playing more riskily,
KEITA becomes much more dangerous.
This is the kind of improvement I love seeing in speedruns,
learning to abuse a risk-reward mechanic
to just get the rewards by simply playing really well.
In a speedrun, a risk-reward item
can very frequently become a reward.
Then they run into Darkroot Basin
and encounter the Black Knight there.
Now, Black Knights are tough enemies in the early game.
They don't take much damage
even when you riposte or backstab them.
You can see this is gonna take quite a-
Oh, he's pushed him off the cliff.
Is rewarded with the Black Knight Halberd.
You only get this weapon for killing the knight
like 20% of the time,
and these knights don't respawn.
This halberd forms the basis of KEITA's strategy,
so if they don't get the halberd here,
they would have to start the run again.
There are definitely countless runs
on the cutting room floor that ended here just because.
You can slightly increase the chance of it dropping
if you have more humanity on you,
but it's still like a crapshoot.
Now, there's a reason the last thing you fight
before the final boss is a Black Knight with a halberd.
Gwyn knew what was up.
This weapon absolutely mashes most enemies and bosses.
Then they just keep going and run all the way around
to the Darkroot Basin entrance to the Undead Parish,
skipping several areas completely.
After beating the gargoyles with a regular old axe,
they use the souls they've gained
to level up enough to equip the halberd,
which they can now just about wield if they two-hand it.
Cairta had precisely figured out
the most efficient way to get the souls they needed
to use this weapon as early as possible.
This means they're able to utterly destroy
the fire bosses that Twilight had to skip completely
because of their weapons.
It's literally faster for Cairta to run through all this
and kill all these bosses
than it is to gather the materials
required to just skip them.
Overall, Cairta saved 15 entire minutes over Twilight
while killing more bosses.
Most of the current record holders in Dark Souls
use this basic strategy now,
but they've saved even more time
by discovering new holes in the game to exploit,
like by messing with the camera system
enough to go out of bounds and enter Sen's Fortress early.
They've improved the strategy so much
that they don't even use the Master Key anymore.
Instead, they use black fire bombs to...
Oh, no.
Black fire bombs?
What a garbage option.
Why would anyone ever pick that?
I just shouldn't be allowed to talk about Dark Souls anymore.
Someone should just fucking come and stop me
before I make him another fucking idiot of myself.
Could someone ever please stop me talking about Dark Sou-
♪♪
-♪♪
This just goes to show how much a run can develop.
The once really obvious main choices
of Pyromancer, Master Key, and Drake Sword
have all, in turn, been superseded.
The creation and development of new runs through games
is really, really fun to watch,
but in a way that's hard to describe.
It's a kind of logistical fun.
Is that a kind of fun?
That doesn't sound like a kind of fun.
It reminds me of the feeling I got when I had my GPS out,
and it told me to take a route through a park
that I knew really well, and I was like,
nah, I can go through that faster,
and I walked a different route, and I got through it faster.
It just felt amazing.
It's a bit like the feeling I got
when I decided I was gonna do my taxes eight months early.
Have you ever done your taxes early?
♪♪
Speedrunning is for you.
♪♪
W-welcome, friend!
♪♪
Wha-?
I have a script for this bit, but I forgot all the words.
Part two, categorization and arbitrarin-
No one I showed this script suggested better titles,
so I'm just gonna have to go with these ones.
Now, I have to admit, I've so far deliberately
not mentioned something about the Dark Souls run.
The progression I described is actually only one
of several different categories of run through the game,
one known as any% no wrong warp.
Like I said before, most of the normal run
is spent killing all the major bosses
to get the Lord Souls to unlock the big door,
which is why it was kind of a big deal
when players figured out a way to teleport right here
on the other side of the door without having to open it.
The game's DLC added an arena
where players could fight each other online.
Swang into tomorrow!
After beating Artorias,
who incidentally was my favorite boss fight
in the series until Bloodborne's DLC came out,
you gain access to the Battle of Stoicism gazebo,
which presumably sounds better in Japanese.
When they join the arena through the gazebo,
players receive a purple coward's crystal,
which they can use to quit a fight
and teleport back to the entrance.
It does this by telling the game to move you
to a certain map and position,
the map being the main DLC area,
and the position being the entrance to the arena.
Now, there are other items in the game
which work similarly,
like the Homeward Bonio or the Dark Sign.
They tell the game to take you to the map
where you last rested at a bonfire
and the position of that bonfire.
So let's say you last rested at the bonfire
in front of the big door.
Barring specific circumstances,
using one of these two items will take you back here.
Now, you can't normally use the purple coward's crystal
outside of the arena. It's grayed out.
Trying to use it makes your character
have a panic attack and think about all the times
they said, you too, when a waiter told them
to enjoy their food, but there's a glitch
that allows players to use items
even when they're not intended to
by trying to use it,
switching to an item they can use,
like the Estus flask,
while holding down the Use button still,
running off an edge while toggling weapons,
and pressing the Use button again on an exact frame,
causing the player to drink the item along with the flask,
which uses it even if you're not supposed to be able to.
What a handy item.
You can visit the gazebo whenever you like.
But here's the thing.
Using the crystal in the main game
has a fancy long animation where you can't do anything
as the game fades to a loading screen,
but when you use it this way,
you can still walk around and use items before it fades,
so what if we used another item that teleports us
while this other effect was going off?
Well, to put it simply,
the game gets confused.
It tries to load you to the map of the last used bonfire,
which in our case is the bonfire before the big door,
which we cleverly napped at before coming here,
but the position of the arena entrance.
The arena entrance the game is looking for
doesn't exist in this map, though,
so instead it takes you to the pre-programmed
default position in the level,
and it turns out that the default position for this area
is inside the Kiln of the First Flame,
so now all players need to do to beat the game
is gain access to this bonfire and the DLC battle arenas,
and then they can warp directly to the last area.
Oh, and also they have to perform
an absurdly precise set of inputs
with barely even a frame of lenience.
Seriously, it's really hard getting this footage alone.
Took me, like, 25 minutes,
but if you can execute this consistently,
which speedrunners are really good at learning to do,
this method saves a lot of time.
However, it was decided by the community
to be so different from the other runs,
since you have to both own the DLC
and abuse a pretty major glitch,
that all runs prior to the discovery of this glitch
and after the discovery but which don't use it
should be split off into their own separate category.
At this point, the Dark Souls speedrun community
has split the game into at least 14 different categories
ranging from extra difficult challenges
such as killing all the bosses
or completing the entire game without leveling up
to absurdist challenges like completing the game
after collecting one of every ring item in the game.
The Lord of the Rings run.
That's a clever name.
This kind of separation of a run
into distinct categories also happened in Bloodborne.
When the game was initially released,
a glitch in some of the architecture
for the game was discovered,
resulting in the player being able to leap off
at an angle from a coffin
and get onto a raised section of wall,
then do an attack at another part of a wall
to clip through,
skipping a whole bunch of the game.
For example, the fight with Ghasgwagni
and leading to the creation of a route
which, supplemented by other tricks,
would eventually only take about 20 minutes,
which is utterly absurd.
However, Bloodborne was pretty heavily patched
after release, making lots of changes and fixes
including that error in the architecture
and also, incidentally, much better load times.
This makes this run impossible to do
on a properly patched version of the game.
It also means the version of the game
you would play today on an online PS4
would be unable to do the fastest speedruns,
which puts you at a pretty major disadvantage.
The solution was for new categories to be created,
so runners could run the original version
of the game if they wanted,
but runners could also compete using the current patch.
The current fastest patched run of the game
is slower by eight minutes,
although, incidentally, because of the massive fixes
to load times, despite the in-game timer
telling you it's almost eight minutes slower,
it's a minute faster to watch in real time.
Bloodborne was messed up when it came out, wasn't it?
Bloodborne's a really interesting game
to run as well in general for a lot of reasons,
one of them being the beast blood pellet,
which adds a meter filled by dealing
certain types of damage, and the higher the meter,
the more damage the player both deals and receives.
It's a bit risk-reward in normal play,
but it's a godsend for speedrunners,
and in some ways, it makes the game easier
for speedrunners by specifically rewarding fast play.
The diverging any% categories in these games
raises interesting questions about the hobby.
In games with multiple categories,
which one is the real speedrun?
Why are some glitches and tricks permitted and others not?
Shouldn't the goal be to create the fastest singular run
and agree on one standard set of rules
for what the speedrun should be?
And how does one decide when something is allowed
and when something should be a separate category or banned?
Well, it depends on both the game and its community.
A game that's impacted by these questions
in a big way is Mirror's Edge.
Mirror's Edge is a game very close to my heart,
to the point that I've speedrun it before as well.
If I'd bothered to submit the run to speedruns.com,
I'd officially be in 201st place.
The thing about Mirror's Edge is it's a game
about moving very quickly.
The player character is very mobile,
has a diverse set of moves across surfaces,
and for picking up speed, and different ways
of jumping onto, off of, and across things.
There are also a lot of little ways the mechanics
can be manipulated to go even faster.
This makes it an ideal speed game.
This runner just executed a trick so quickly
at the beginning that you probably didn't even see it.
Right as they loaded in, they turned to the side
and did a side hop, which immediately gets them
up to top speed.
This is one of my favorite tricks right here.
Normally, this pole, like, you have to slowly
do a balancing act as you walk across it.
You're taking your sweet old time.
Runners have reached the point where they leap onto it
in a straight line and don't fall off,
and then turn and do another jump off of it,
so they never have to do it. It's incredible.
Playing Mirror's Edge as fast as you can,
and then going online and checking out a speedrun
is a really fun experience.
There are so many nuances and specifics
to the game's level designs and movement mechanics
that it's just a joy to see how much extra speed
can be teased out.
But the game's parkour focus and aesthetic
also poses a question for runners.
What does it mean to speedrun?
What does it mean to speedrun Mirror's Edge?
There's a variety of interesting glitches
available to exploit if you want to beat
Mirror's Edge as fast as possible,
but some of them significantly impact
the way the game is played and what the experience
of watching it is like.
Take, for example, the out-of-bounds glitch,
or OOB.
Plenty of games let you get OOB of the level
and use this to get to places meant to be reached
through slower or harder means.
This can be used very egregiously
to bypass large chunks of several levels,
and this is technically much, much faster
than playing the game the normal way.
But it also runs counter to the sort of principles
that make Mirror's Edge the game you'd want to see speedrun
in the first place, doesn't it?
It's a game all about motion, finesse,
clever use of controls and timing
to skirt along the edge of the proverbial mirror,
not to clip through it and then just win.
Part of the fun of speedrunning is watching a game
being played very skillfully and very quickly,
and some tricks rub up against what some people
would define as skillfully playing the game.
So Mirror's Edge has multiple categories
for the main run through the game,
including Any% and Glitchless.
In Any%, you can be treated to a faster run of the game
using a lot of technical trickery
to run across surfaces in weird and impossible ways,
accelerate far faster than was probably ever intended,
abuse a bizarre mistake in the wall-run kick programming
that allows you to jump on one frame right afterwards
like Faith had a double jump or something,
slide into parts of the world you were never meant to see,
have an LSD trip nightmare as every frame
of Faith's movement is suspended before her eyes,
and climb through moving elevators
to shoot up into darkness.
This run is really interesting and showcases
some amazing tricks and moves,
but it's also maybe not the sort of stuff
it's fun to see specifically in a speedrun
of this type of game.
This is obviously highly subjective, of course,
but the community seems to agree with me, so I win.
In around 2013, they introduced the Glitchless category,
which specifically prohibits using major glitches
that alter the flow of the game in this way.
Glitchless runs don't go out of bounds,
don't abuse the weird extra jump you can get
from kicking off a wall,
and prohibit a few other specific tricks
that some people might deem against the spirit
of Mirror's Edge.
Glitchless has never and will never be faster than any percent,
but to me, at least, it's even more entertaining to watch.
Runners in this category are navigating
through more of the intended world of Mirror's Edge,
which, for someone who played and really liked the game,
is a way more interesting challenge.
All kinds of segments that are completely avoided
by fairly easy tricks in any percent
have to actually be played and routed properly in Glitchless.
Let's compare just one jump across both categories.
Here's the entrance to the RPA building in the second level.
This jump is one of the first properly tough jumps
in the game. It's a long distance,
but also involves downward traversal.
You have to approach it at speed and jump really late,
but also roll when you land or you get hurt.
Either rolling or taking damage is really slow.
A runner doesn't really want to do either of those things.
In the current Glitchless world record,
the runner Wreck executes an incredibly skillful maneuver
to take full advantage of this rail here,
so they land on the rail instead of the regular ground,
which prevents them having to roll or take damage,
but they also turned in midair and executed a side jump
to immediately get back to top speed when they landed.
This is really, really cool.
It's really difficult to do. I can't do it.
Here's the same part in the current Any% world record
by Philotrax.
Trax abuses the wall kick jump
to effectively fly over this challenging gap,
landing safely on some of the game's trademark
white plant furniture stuff.
Extrapolating tricks like this across a full game run
makes for two very different and uniquely interesting paths
through the game to watch.
Earlier, I asked the question of which category
should be considered the real speedrunner of the game,
but I don't think there's an objective answer,
at least for most games.
Even in Bloodborne's case,
using bugs that were patched out later,
this is a version of Bloodborne that was released,
and it beats the game as fast as possible,
and in Mirror's Edge, maybe clipping through walls
should be seen as just as valid a strategy as not doing so,
but everyone gets to decide for themselves
how to figure out what a speedrun needs to be,
and usually there's gonna be enough people
who feel that way that it's gonna end up
as a speedrun category,
and the Mirror's Edge community has come up
with quite a lot of categories over the years.
I've only talked about one of the extra ones so far.
There's also Any% in bounds,
which specifically avoids out-of-bounds glitches
if you think going oob is wrong
and are okay with the more advanced
wall kick jump tricks and stuff.
There's much more healthy competition
when there are multiple agreed sets of rules to choose from.
I imagine if there had only been one ruling
for how to speedrun Mirror's Edge,
it would be a lot less satisfying for a lot of runners
and wouldn't have seen quite as many runners
come and go over the years.
One runner eventually got a job at DICE
and worked on the sequel,
which apparently some people even played,
so that's nice.
Speedrunning is a completely arbitrary challenge,
one that most developers never even think to account for,
so it's totally fine to have multiple ways
of categorizing runs,
different kinds of challenge and so on
because some types of run are more interesting than others
and none are really any more valid
because they're all ultimately just silly things
some people do for the sake of fun and competition.
I think it's cool that even what it means
to play a game quickly can be up for discussion sometimes.
My favorite type of Mirror's Edge run
is the 69 stars category, which is very nice.
It's the category for running through all the game's
optional time trials in one sitting
and getting all the stars.
It really embodies the things I enjoy the most
about the Glitchless speedrun.
It's just great performances utilizing mechanics
mostly intended by the game's developers.
Runners do awesome stuff like ignore the game's
in-built run-ups for big jumps
and instead make really precise movement over them
to jump manually at the edge and make it further and faster.
It's awesome.
The current number one record is by Voatiem?
Voatiem? I'm not sure,
who got in just a teeny smidge over 21 minutes
due to a couple of minor mistakes.
You're kidding, right?
Someone is going to beat 21 minutes in this category,
and I can't wait. It's gonna be awesome.
And because Mirror's Edge seems to inspire
utter obsession in its fans, myself included,
speedrun.com also has a category extension leaderboard
for even more weirder and specific runs.
Uh, speedrun.com slash memeem.
Heh heh. It's pretty great.
There's a true Glitchless category here
for weirdo purists like me who just want to see
the actual game played near perfectly.
There's categories that often only even have
one or two submitters where, like,
runs where one runner uses the mouse
and another uses the keyboard
or where two runners each use half of one controller.
Honestly, this is just getting silly now.
What about a New Game Plus category
where players chapter select the last segment
and beat it in 13 seconds
and people are genuinely down to counting milliseconds
to figure out who was actually the fastest?
What about RBO, reverse boss order,
where runners chapter select to each boss in the game
in reverse order and time beating each of them?
What about reverse RBO, where they do RBO backwards?
Why would you do it like that?
That's just boss. Why is it called that?
How about Any% x 25,
where one runner has decided to run the game
25 times in a row,
which took over 17 hours
and which they openly declare no one will ever beat?
What the fuck are your sidesteps right now?
I told you I'm not even paying attention anymore.
Why would you do this, Hekigan?
Was your 60-millisecond lead in New Game Plus
not enough anymore? Did you need something stronger?
What are you doing to yourself?
This is also where the segmented speedrun lives
with various runners including the aforementioned Hekigan,
Votime, Votime,
Philotrax, and Wreck all contributing small segments
to produce an absolutely incredible run.
It's a fabulous expression of a community's commitment
to beating a game as fast as possible
and their years of developing skills
and learning more and more about how the game works.
I love it. Link in the description.
Just give it a look. It's just great.
There's a tremendous sense of community to speedrunning.
People share information and discoveries,
discuss theories together,
and all the tricks used in runs are by their nature
immediately available for further analysis
and use in other runs.
I remember, like, way back in the day,
like, in 2014, like, I was in a Skype call
with some other SMS runners.
We were watching Tobu do some runs,
and we've never seen that spin jump before,
and it just, like, it blew our minds.
We're like, okay, I'm never gonna go for that,
and that was just, like, commonplace,
so that just goes to show, like,
how far this game has come.
Yeah. Speedrunning is an almost
inherently collectivist activity in this sense.
While there is competition to be the best
and take or hold the record,
almost no record holder has completely earned
that position all on their own.
The best runs owe a debt to the discoveries
and ideas contributed by previous runners.
The best run is often representative
of many people's contributions
alongside the runner's own skill, of course.
In a sense, speedruns are always a group effort.
It's really not surprising that awesome charity events
like GDQ have emerged from this space.
It's just a grander scaled version
of what speedrunning had kind of always been.
You can't copyright a technique or strategy
for beating a video game quickly.
There are no patents in speedrunning.
Proving that you got a time
or even getting the fastest time
isn't just an achievement or personal victory.
It's also automatically a contribution
to the greater community effort,
and that's radical.
But speedrunning isn't always about socialism.
Sometimes it's about beating video games very quickly.
Part three, in-depth investigation.
Actually, no, I've thought of a better title for this one.
Donkey Kong.
Ah!
["DONKEY KONG 64 THEME"]
["DONKEY KONG 64 THEME"]
Donkey Kong 64 is a game by Rareware
for the Nintendo 64.
Oh, you don't need to know that part.
It's very much the embodiment of the stereotypes
about Rare's games for the time period.
Large levels full of hundreds of different specific items
you have to collect to unlock more things to collect.
For instance, each level has 500 bananas,
but what makes it particularly troublesome
is that some items are specifically
for one of the five characters you play.
To collect enough stuff to progress,
you'd have to traverse the same environments
over and over with every character,
and the levels were often really big.
At the time, it made the game feel big
and like a cool, sprawling adventure
that lasted a long time and had a lot of chances
to see how each character can progress
through the same environment
using their own skills and abilities.
That's because I was seven years old.
["BOOM"]
Now it just feels like time-consuming busywork.
Lots of this was completely unnecessary
from a design standpoint, too.
You could design a game with collectibles
only one character could reach in the first place
instead of most of the time just having them
hanging out there, faded out,
reminding you you're gonna have to come back here again
with another character,
and running back to that barrel that changes characters
because you need to pick something else up is awful.
Running back to previously completed levels
because you finally have the characters you needed
to pick up those bananas you'd already walked past
eight times is a more painful tragedy
than Titus Andronicus.
I would cut off my hand and send it to Emperor Saturninus
if it meant I could have just picked that banana up
four hours ago with Daddy Kong instead of Yankle Kong.
I can feel my cells dividing
as my precious existence rushes toward its finite end
with nothing in the world to beguile my sorrow
but the sweet siren song of,
ooh, banana.
Donkey Kong 64 is an existential crisis
in the form of a video game cartridge.
I'm actually more aware of the futility of my existence
after trying to go back and play this.
Now, I could sit you down and explain the progression
of the Donkey Kong 64 Any% run to you
like it was the back of my hand,
but firstly, there's already a video
by Summoning Salt out there doing just that,
and that video's better than anything I could do,
so you should just go check that one out,
and secondly, well, to be honest,
I've seen a lot of speedruns at this point,
and I'm kind of used to it, you know?
Oh, yeah, Donkey Kong 64,
a game I beat in 72 hours as a kid
being beaten by a professional in 30 minutes.
Yeah, sure, that's impressive.
To a clown at the circus, I need something stronger.
I've built up a tolerance to this stuff.
We need to go deeper and darker.
We need to talk about the players who will settle
for nothing more than total conquest,
and no, I'm not talking about
Donkey Kong Country 2 Diddy's Kong Quest.
You get it's a pun.
No, I'm talking about the Donkey Kong 64 100% speedrun.
Yeah.
Well, technically, it's the 101% speedrun
because Rareware were pretty good
at ironically recognizing that they'd put
way too many collectibles in their goddamn game.
To achieve 101% completion,
players must collect the Nintendo coin,
the Rareware coin, all eight keys,
all ten battle crowns, all 20 fairies,
all 201 golden bananas,
and all 40 banana medals,
each of which is awarded for collecting
75 of a Kong's bananas in a level
for a total of 3,000 bananas.
Hey, but sometimes they come in little bunches of five.
Thanks, Donkey Kong.
The rules list for this run on speedrun.com
actually includes the stipulation
that to submit runs for this category,
you must hate yourself.
Runners in this category endure such supreme torments
that one of them fucking streamed themselves
breaking their cartridge to make sure it was over.
This is my DK cart.
Fun fact.
Did you know that the PAL version
of the Donkey Kong 64 cartridge was gray,
but the US retail version was banana yellow?
Heh, you learn something new every day.
This run is challenging in far more ways
than the traditional run.
In that run, your objective is fairly simple.
Find the fastest way to the end,
whatever that way may be,
abusing cutscene glitches,
level skips, moon jumps, et cetera,
effectively ending up with runs
where you do as little as possible.
This run's core is having to actually do
everything the game asks of you,
planning the most efficient route possible
through all of it,
and then somehow actually doing it all
precisely and quickly,
but with hundreds of golden bananas to collect,
and some of these can be very challenging,
and thousands of bananas!
Executing on all of this in succession
introduces a new kind of test for these runners,
resilience.
Paradoxically, as with the Beast Blood pellet,
when quicker strategies are found,
often that makes the game easier to beat
because the length of time you have to focus
on execution has gotten shorter.
You only have to pull off 30 minutes of good stuff
to beat the Any% run in 30 minutes.
If something takes around five hours to beat,
that's five hours of time to make mistakes in.
Five hours to get tired or lose focus
or slip from your intended most efficient path.
These runs are essentially torture,
and they're amazing.
There's a three-year-old run by German runner 360 Chris M.
that took 19 hours and 53 minutes.
The best part of this run is it has face cam.
You can watch in real time as the sun sets and rises,
and he gets ever closer to making it to the end.
He no-sells it, too.
Like, by the end, he still doesn't seem that tired.
It's kind of awesome.
Despite there being plenty of runs
that are way, way more optimized,
the better runs push the five-and-a-half-hours mark,
there's something very special about runs like this one
where they probably know their planned route
is gonna take them a full day,
but they sit down and do it.
I kind of love runs like this just for their sheer dedication
regardless of how efficient they are.
Yeah!
Whoo!
Sub 20, boys!
PB, boys. I PB'd by, uh,
four hours and six minutes.
Pretty solid.
Wait, his last attempt took nearly 25 hou—
Holy shi—
The various runs of this game have led players
to look very closely at almost every aspect,
even going so far as using hacking software
to analyze the code in detail,
looking for anything that can be exploited
to make runs faster.
DK64 has been investigated in a level of detail
greater than the developers could have ever intended
or expected, and that's led to new discoveries
but also to something really cool.
Enter Isotarge.
Isotarge is a runner with a really respectable time
in the any% category,
but it's also the longest-standing run
in the top ten by far.
In fact, it was the world record for six months back in 2015.
Isotarge has made a lot of contributions to the community,
including spending a lot of time digging around
inside the game's code, finding new glitches
and holes in world geometry and so on,
anything that could be exploited to get better runs.
Isotarge has found a lot of cool stuff in the game,
including this image of a Rareware employee's face
hidden inside the game's files,
which looks like it's been edited in a Game Boy Camera,
but they've also found stuff like this.
Out-of-bounds collectibles.
It's common for developers to leave items and objects
in places players can't get to in the game proper
and not worry about removing them,
like this coin hidden in a wall in Mario 64
that someone actually figured out how to get,
and since these items exist well outside
the intended scope of the game,
runs don't usually consider them collectibles
as part of a run.
They're more cool oddities
that shouldn't really be considered as game objects
to be collected.
But what if an item was absolutely collectible
without any glitches,
but no one had found it before?
One day when messing around in the game's code
looking for flags for collectible objects,
Isotarge found a banana coin
that hadn't been accounted for in the level Fungi Forest.
Banana coins in DK64 are used to buy items and upgrades,
and because this is Donkey Kong 64,
there are six different kinds of banana coin.
There's one color for each character,
but also a multicolored one,
which is usually hard to find
and gives five coins to every character
as soon as it's collected.
There's only 15 of them in the game,
one in each level except Angry Aztec,
which has two, and seven in the hub world of DK Isles.
This new coin wasn't any of the ones
that had been collected before,
but unlike the other items,
this one wasn't out of bounds.
It was hidden in a place no one had ever thought to check,
hidden in the tall grass in the level,
right about hee- no, wait, sorry,
right about...
here.
And there it is.
As far as I can tell,
this coin isn't mentioned anywhere on the Internet
prior to its discovery by Isotarge in the game's code,
and it's not in any strategy guide
from the time period I can get my hands on.
It's not really known whether the developers
put this coin here intentionally,
or forgot to remove it,
or why they thought to give so little indication it was there.
It's easy to see why it was missed for so long.
Now, a cool kicker to this story
would be that it invalidated all the 101% runs,
or it turned out that there are now technically
102% runs or something,
but banana coins aren't counted for percentages
on the game's menu screen,
and the total amount of coins you can get
isn't even listed in the game anywhere.
The 101% run doesn't even include all of the bananas
because the game only counts banana medals
towards completion, so they don't even get
all the bananas in the runs where you get 101% completion,
which is a bit of a disappointment, really.
You should get them all next time.
To amuse me.
Here's the SGDQ run in 2017,
soon after the coin was discovered,
where they just stopped to get it for kicks.
Lo and behold, it is...
the Rainbow Coin!
Yeah.
Uh, that Rainbow Coin has been hidden
basically since the game came out,
so, uh, over 16 years, right?
It's not technically a major discovery,
and it changes nothing about how the game is run
in the main categories,
outside of what are essentially
ultra-masochistic jokes that people only really do
just to be one of the two people who ever did it at all,
but it's still a really, really cool discovery.
Something was hidden just out of plain sight,
even to the people who would make a point
of collecting everything in the game
for 17 years.
What's fun about the Banana Coin
is that it's kind of an abstract example
of how awesome speedrunning communities are
for deconstructing and examining games.
Like, people are so dedicated
to coming to an understanding of a game,
they're uncovering things which probably would've remained
hidden forever otherwise.
And that's just neat, no matter how you peel it.
Oh, God, did I just say...
Why is speedrunning awesome?
Because people are awesome.
Because watching someone try something
over and over again, getting better and better,
and learning new secrets and strategies
in order to be the best at something,
sometimes for years,
is compelling and fascinating and human
in a way that no other form of media,
no television show could ever adequately replicate,
because a real human person
is sitting right there and doing it.
I opened this video using clips
from an attempt to finish Zelda Ocarina of Time
in the Any% category by skater82297.
This video in particular is one of my favorites.
This guy's been hammering away at Zelda Ocarina of Time
since at least 2014,
shaving seconds, fractions of seconds,
off of his personal best.
Here's a cool trick. On speedrun.com,
you can actually click to see all of the obsoleted runs,
runs that a runner has themselves gone on to supersede.
If you turn that on,
this guy basically is the top 20 fastest runs of Zelda
of all time.
But he didn't have number one.
Someone else was faster than him.
So he just kept going and going.
And you can see all of his runs.
And live on his channel,
you could have seen all of the many, many attempts
that went into even getting those runs.
And in this run, you see him get annoyed
by the tiniest things.
Goma doesn't activate for about a second longer
than he thinks it should,
and it just frustrates the hell out of him.
Dude.
Fuck you!
Fuck you!
Fuck you! Fuck you!
Fuck you.
No. Fucking shit, dude.
Fuck off.
I'm mad. Now fuck off.
He's angry about this boss not spawning fast enough,
even though he can kill it in seconds flat.
That was bullshit, dude.
That was utter shit.
That was bullshit.
A random onlooker would wonder why someone did this to themselves,
did something over and over,
even though it clearly wasn't any fun for them.
But then, they get deeper and deeper into the run.
And they start to realize that this might be the one.
The tone changes.
Things get quiet.
This might be happening.
Is it happening?
Oh, my God. Oh, my God.
Oh, my God.
Towards the end, he can barely even control his breathing.
He's panicking. He's anxious.
But he knows that if he can just execute on the ideas
that he's been developing for years,
this might be it.
Oh, my God, dude!
Oh, my fucking God!
Oh!
Okay. Okay.
Yes, dude!
Fucking yes!
Yes!
Oh, my God!
Yes!
Yes!
Yes, dude!
Oh, my God!
Yes!
Oh, my God!
Oh, my God, dude!
This run is currently the fastest run anyone has ever done
of The Legend of Zelda Ocarina of Time.
And then, in that moment,
in that period of being utterly overjoyed at this achievement,
it becomes clear why people do this.
And what you can get from this that you can't get anywhere else.
It's a story.
Not something written or directed by someone.
A real human story.
It's a story of perseverance and triumph.
And it's derived from something so small and silly-seeming,
but that only makes it more beautiful in a way.
And the best part is, the story's not over.
There's almost always more to learn about how to run any given game.
Always someone trying to beat the record.
And anyone can be a part of that.
Or, at the very least, anyone can be there to watch it happen.
This is probably why so many people tune in to events like GDQ
and even donate money to support work that helps keep people alive
so they can spend time with the people they love.
Or, you know, watching speedruns.
Hmm.
Hmm.
Okay, I have to admit, I told a bit of a porky pie earlier.
That's Cockney rhyming slang for lie,
which I clearly know, obvious Cockney, that I am.
I never actually beat Donkey Kong 64 as a kid.
I played it for 72 hours, and then I couldn't beat
the Donkey Kong arcade part near the end,
which you need to do to unlock the final boss fight.
So I had 72 hours of play and nothing to show for it.
And, frankly, that's piss.
So to finally put this little fucker to rest,
I'm gonna stream it.
I'm gonna start the game again,
and I'm gonna get absolutely everything in that game,
including the rainbow coin just to bring everything full circle,
and I'm gonna get absolutely everything, all the bananas,
not the minimum required for 101% completion,
and I'm not gonna stop until it's done.
I might, I will, fall asleep in my chair.
I'm not that resilient, although it is currently,
no joke, 2.41 a.m.
Hope you can see that.
So I might do okay, but I should probably rig it up
so that if anyone donates, an air horn will go off
and wake me up. Let's just torture me
for other people's enjoyment.
And all the donations will go to charity.
So finally some good can come out of Donkey Kong 64,
because certainly no fun has come out of it.
Anyway, thanks for watching this video.
Um, it's really just a love letter to the speedrunning community
because I just find it's been such a fulfilling part of my life,
and it looks like a lot of other people's.
A lot of gaming spaces can be pretty clicky at times,
and I think speedrunning has generally avoided that
with a lot of sort of close-knit but quite friendly communities.
A lot of people were really forthcoming with information
when I was doing research for this video,
and that was just really awesome, and I just think it's cool
how people can share the things they enjoy
and learn more about stuff and occasionally raise
quite a lot of money for some really good causes.
I just think the whole thing is so fun and kind
in a way that you don't see very often.
So, yeah, just thought it was nice.
Probably could have thought of a clever ending to this video,
but...
Uh...
