The dog days of summer are upon us.
So that means it's time for Corona Extra with lime, because that's how we roll.
Before you get all snobby on us, bear in mind, this is like the summer drink, if you don't
get it in your eye.
Yeah, don't get the lime in your eye.
So what's this I got in my hand, internet?
I don't know.
Could that be our letter of acceptance to some big publisher?
I don't know.
Let's drink before we find out.
I certainly haven't read this yet.
All right, so this is from Sterling Lord Literistic.
Wow.
This is one of the most prestigious and oldest literary agencies in New York City.
Well, go team.
And it says, Dear Sarah Ellinson of 1124 Generic Strassa Street.
Strassa just Street.
Generic Street.
I was just in Germany.
She lives in Trotwood, Ohio.
I think that was Lisa's contribution.
It says, Dear Miss Ellinson, thank you for your query and interest in our representation.
I've had a chance to review Awoken, and though what you're attempting is very ambitious,
I'm not certain that it works.
Certainly the Elder Gods aspect is an interesting new angle for a paranormal romance, but I
feel that the characters are still lacking unique and dynamic voices.
At present, they appear to be rather one dimensional.
As a result, I fear this manuscript does not altogether work for me.
Please remember that reactions to fiction are entirely subjective, so we recommend that
you try some other agents.
That was really nice of her.
That was very nice of her.
It's almost like she was in on the joke.
This is a really good example of the nicest, most helpful rejection letter you could possibly,
possibly hope for.
So yeah, this can go up on our wall of proud.
We got another rejection that was unfortunately not on a lovely printout with a company letterhead.
First off, it was the agent's assistant, and it was just like, sorry, this isn't for me.
Better luck next time.
Which seems to be the more common form of rejection.
So short.
Short.
Yeah.
And I gotta be honest, I'm finding that even though it is like, the query is ridiculous,
and we will read it, not this episode, but another one, it's still kind of nerve-wracking
and it just kind of hurts your feelings, you know?
What do you mean you're injecting our magnum opus of Cthulian love?
Do you know how many people it took to make this?
I feel like it's in the thousands by now.
But with these two rejections from literary agencies, I should also bring up the fact
that we did get some interest from an actual publisher, and this was kind of completely
out of the blue.
This was not something I reached out for.
Someone messaged me.
I'm not going to mention the publisher by name, but it's a small, independent publisher
that specializes in science fiction, and one of their associate editors contacted me and
said, hey, I've been watching the show, maybe you want to send us your manuscript and see
if we might like to do something with it.
And so that brought up an interesting sort of dilemma, since we were sort of going on
the assumption that we were going to get rejected from everything because it's ridiculous.
And then we were going to self-publish it and continue this ruse of this fake author
who lives in Truttwood, Ohio with her five children, Matt A., Matt B., Allison, Josh,
and Mary Ann.
And now it's like, well, this brings up an interesting little dilemma.
And that I think a lot of authors are struggling with right now, which is the question of traditional
publishing through an actual publisher versus self-publishing, which is easier now than
it has ever been in all of the history of the publishing.
So traditional publishing through a publisher, publishing house, agents probably involved.
Well, with those, there's often, what, the cash advance, there's people to actually help
you edit your novel, make it the best it can be in theory.
And also some marketing that I would think would go in it as well.
It kind of exists on a spectrum.
There are, I think the most common one is you publish with a traditional publisher and
they give you a cash advance and then after a certain amount of successful sales you start
to get residuals.
There are some, especially newer digital imprints that have no cash advance.
There are some that are residual only.
It's like a wide spectrum that kind of varies from the traditional Stephanie Meyer gets
an agent, agent finds a publisher, they publish it, she gets a seven-figure advance, I'm not
kidding.
Six-figure.
She was six-figure, not seven-figure, sorry.
But she apparently did get a six-figure advance for the Twilight series.
This does not happen anymore.
And then, of course, there's self-publishing.
Which is completely changing the paradigm, especially in light of our good friend E.L.
James here.
There are a lot of authors that did kind of start in this genre that we are exploring
slash parodying.
Amanda Hawking is one.
I'm not familiar, I haven't read any of her stuff but I know she was very popular in Amazon.
Colleen Hawke?
Hooke?
So it is changing the paradigm a little bit but I think in terms of the actual publishing
industry these people are extreme outliers.
The vast, vast, vast, vast, vast majority of people who self-publish will sell like
three and a half copies.
So the question is, what would be better for our Sarah Ellinson traditional publishing,
and we're not assuming that this publisher will like her masterpiece, which we did design
to be a very subtle parody.
It's not like a Harvard blampoon, you know?
Of course, there is a question of turnaround.
Yeah, exactly.
If we did go with a traditional publisher and if they did like it and they made us an
offer it would take at least a year for the public to see the light of day because we
have to do copy editing and then we have to do the early reviewers and the bookboggers
and then it's because publishing is like, the film industry is like a greyhound, publishing
is like a sloth on Xanax or something.
Now I mean you made the mention before of E.L.
James went very quickly from self-published to a smaller publishing company to Random
House.
Very fast turnaround and oh brother does it show.
The phrase, floor the pedal to the metal is in the final manuscript.
Floor the pedal to the metal, okay.
It's like someone gave it one more run through and was like, done.
Yeah, it's going to make us money, I don't care.
And it worked.
And it worked?
Yeah, it worked.
There is that but there's also, if we did go with a traditional publisher we'd kind
of have to give up our ruse.
It would be harder, yeah, he would have to drop the Sarah Ellison.
Yeah, we would still use the pseudonym but there wouldn't be the ruse, we wouldn't have
our fake author getting in Facebook fights with reviewers that gave her a bad review,
which she totally would by the way.
She's that person.
We'd have to delete all the kid tweets.
Yeah, all the kids.
All the kids with their Twitter set up.
Which is the one with the Transformers jacket.
That's Josh.
And also we kind of have a leg up that other potential self-publishing authors might not
in that we have an audience.
You!
Viewers like you.
We have an audience that has been following this for months so obviously they're like
yeah we want it, we want it now, we want to see the horror.
Or hope that you don't.
Well, I mean, it is kind of a push-pull.
There is a lot of benefit to traditional publishing still, but you have complete creative control
over your own product and how you market it when you self-publish.
And also you get more money.
That is true.
Per unit sold.
Because honestly our plan had been if we do go the self-publishing route, like once we
get our stack of rejections, we would do that probably by the end of the summer.
But if, you know, it might be longer if the traditional publishing thing does happen.
We would have to sadly drop our ruse, but might end up with a better product, more interesting
product.
It is tempting, but it's so tempting.
Like if they show, like after they read it and they show that actual interest to be able
to say no, I'm a published author through an actual publisher.
Yeah.
I mean, because there is still...
Me and seven other people.
There is still, absolutely.
Well, I mean, that's the thing.
There is still this idea that if you self-publish you are not really a writer.
You know, that you're...
And I think that will change because like blogging, like if you write for Jezebel, you
are a journalist now.
That wasn't the case five, ten years ago.
The paradigm is shifting.
It's just a question of how much and how fast.
And I think, but the other thing is like if they did make us an offer and we took it,
that would take some creative control away because, you know, obviously they'd want to
make changes.
They might want to push it.
I mean, what if they don't want to?
More in the parody direction.
There is a definite allure to both sides.
I look forward to seeing how it develops, a new, a challenger has arisen.
Yeah.
So that's where we stand.
Thank you for sticking around this long.
As we have shopped it around.
We could maybe, after a couple weeks, release at least a part of it just so people will
know what it ended up being like.
Well, maybe like the first that we send for.
Of course.
Once again, the Twitter, our author's Twitter, who might not end up being the thing.
I was really looking forward to her getting in fights with people who left bad reviews
on Goodreads.
Because I love it when people do that.
I'm watching you lesser known authors that get in fights with people who leave you bad
reviews on Goodreads.
Oh yeah, you are an inspiration to our non-existent authorists.
