Hey everyone.
Since alt-right identarians value free speech and debate so much, I think it's really
important we keep an open dialogue.
So Nazis flagged my video Why White Nationalism is Wrong, and now it's in restricted mode
and unwatchable in a lot of countries.
Now it's a year old video, I'm the wrong gender in it, and I would have been perfectly
happy to let it just fade into obscurity, but they had to go and flag it, and anything
they want to silence, I want to amplify.
So I've re-edited the video and removed all hate symbols, and hopefully that will
appease the censor.
Otherwise I've left the video unchanged.
My name has always been Natalie, and don't you remember?
Proud sons of the North, my training is complete.
So you may remember, in my video about alpha males, I responded to a guy called The Golden
One.
In that video I said I wasn't going to argue against white nationalism, I just assumed
that it was wrong.
And of course that's pretty irritating to white nationalists, who want to bait me into
arguing with them.
So any mention of Jewish power is refuted by saying Nazi.
This is why race realism and ethno-nationalism are becoming more popular.
You people have no arguments.
Typical femi-cultist moonshine, you are so clearly subsumed by the totalizing effects
of the femi-monolith that alternative codices of gender relationality are unequivocally
out of your grasp, and its subjects are psychopathologized to a degree that could in and of itself be
aptly pre-codified with similar heuristic ease as pathological.
Racism and sexism are nothing more than heresiological heuristics for the non-obese and agents.
You have no argument against The Golden One or white nationalism, only bitter insults
and reductio ad Hitlerum.
So in this video I want to go through the exercise of explaining exactly what's wrong
with white nationalism, both to clear myself of the accusation of relying only on insults,
and, possibly, to persuade some people who may sympathize with white nationalist views.
Now the conventional leftist wisdom is that you shouldn't argue with white nationalists
because it grants them a kind of legitimacy when you give them a seat at the discussion
table.
But at this point I think a lot of people privately or publicly hold white nationalist
views already, and the public may never hear strong arguments against them.
Also, speaking as a mental a**hole alcoholic transsexual with less than a third the YouTube
subscribers of the second largest channel about the lives of ants, I think the danger
of my being the one to catapult white nationalism into mainstream acceptability is pretty remote.
So in this video I'm not going to use the words racist or Nazi, even though those are
completely fair and accurate descriptions.
I don't need to insult these fascist f**ks because I believe that reason will prevail.
So in this video I'm going to remain at all times rational, calm, relaxing, soothing.
Why don't you just lie back and relax and I'm going to crinkle this page I tore out
of my comp and we can just have a nice soothing conversation about the wave of far-right extremism
sweeping through Europe.
sk sk sk sk sk sk...
Jews.
Part 1, white nationalism with a friendly face.
The Golden Ones recent videos are all about how to be a good representative for the nationalist
cause, that is, how to tone down the uh I can't say Nazi, the sinister crackpot aspects
of the program.
And apparently that means wearing a suit, not jacking off, and protecting the racial
purity of Skyrim.
Skyrim belongs to the Nords.
It also means trying to distance the movement from the idea that it's based on racial
hate, something white nationalists have been doing for a long time.
Here's the website of a group called the Loyal White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan,
which seems to have been designed around the same time as the promotional website for the
1996 movie Space Jam.
The website promises to dispel some of the lies told about us by the liberal news media.
Let me start by addressing the repeated falsehood that we are a hate group.
Let me assure you that nothing could be further from the truth.
We do not hate any group of people.
We hate drugs, homosexuality, abortion, and race mixing, because these things go against
God's law and they are destroying all white nations.
So this sounds pretty similar to the Golden Ones' bizarre cocktail of not drinking,
not cumming, not having sex with brown people, and generally shunning everything worth doing.
Minus the Christianity, plus a little light high fantasy Odinism.
My Nordic masculinity has grown as firm and robust as the hammer of Thor.
Really?
Stormfront admin Jack Boot, who's definitely not a Nazi, posts a white nationalism FAQ
from the 90s where it's explained that,
"...the desire of white nationalists to form their own nation has nothing to do with superiority
or inferiority.
In fact, formation of a white nation removes any plausibility of white dominance of other
races as well as the plausibility of the accusation that whites wish to dominate others."
So this is the standard white nationalist PR move.
You say, what?
Hate group?
That's not us.
What are you talking about?
We're just a bunch of God-lovin' folks who take pride in our own people.
And where is the harm in that?
Part 2.
Where is the harm in that?
So we've got the KKK pretending to stand up for diversity, Stormfront users with Nazi-
ahh- traditional right-wing extremist symbology claiming not to be white supremacists, and
the Golden Ones saying that poor maligned Hitler didn't actually hate the Jews.
Now a lot of mere mortals with a pleb-tier understanding of the word say like, oh Hitler
hated Jews.
No, he actually didn't.
If you think he did, ask yourself why did he have a Jewish chiffor and bodyguard?
Why were there so many Jews fighting in the Wehrmacht?
Hitler's battle was against international Jewry.
International finance.
I hope none of you are buying any of this.
Still, I think perhaps the Golden One raises an important point.
Namely, is the problem with Hitler really that he hated the Jews?
I mean, I think just about everyone harbors racial animosity of some kind.
In my case, I happen to hate the Belgians.
Fuck this waffle.
But the point is not what your private emotions are so much as what you do with them.
So it's not hate per se that's the problem so much as the politics it produces.
It's what Hitler did and said that distinguishes him, and what he did is kill all the European
Jews.
And why'd he do that?
Well, in the name of purging Europe of all non-Aryan peoples, which is precisely the
goal of white nationalism.
Now I know people are gonna say, see, you're just resorting to talking about Nazis and
the Holocaust, argument ad Hitlerum, to which I respond, that when the subject at hand is
ethnic cleansing inspired by anti-Semitic conspiracy theories, Nazis and the Holocaust
are pretty goddamn relevant, wouldn't you say?
And of course I realize that isn't going to be very convincing to white nationalists,
since most of these fucking people are Holocaust deniers, and if the overwhelming evidence
described by pretty much every academic historian who looks at the issue isn't enough to convince
them that it happened, I doubt that anything I can say will be.
When you're so deep in a conspiracy theory that all opposing evidence is immediately
dismissed as some kind of Jewish hoax, well, there's not much arguing with you.
Though I have to wonder why people whose explicit goal is the ethnic cleansing of so-called
white nations find it so impossible to believe that other people with that exact same goal
actually took a swing at it.
Now white nationalists will tell you that ethnic cleansing can actually be non-violent.
After all, couldn't non-whites simply be peacefully banished from so-called white nations?
Well, no.
There are around 39 million African Americans and 57 million Hispanic people in the United
States alone.
Where are they going to go?
What will people in the new places think about welcoming, oh, 100 million refugees?
I mean, even Nazi, I mean alt-right Germany, began with non-violent methods of coercing
Jewish immigration.
It was only later that it escalated to attacks on their property, ghettoization, mass incarceration,
and finally extermination.
So excuse me for not feeling very reassured.
That Stormfront FAQ proposes that white Americans could simply cede lost territory and move
to uninhabited lands.
And you know guys, I think that is a great idea.
Why don't you all move to your little colony in Wyoming and leave everyone else alone?
Don't take your computers with you, delete your social media accounts.
Because that is a Jewish invention.
Haha!
Part 3.
Whiteness
Traditionally, nationalism is a political ideology that places the communal identification
with a nation or people at the center of politics.
National identity usually involves a shared language, history, and geographical locus.
So while, say, German nationalism or Japanese nationalism are both terrible political philosophies,
they at least kind of make sense, insofar as there's sort of such a thing as the German
people or the Japanese people.
White nationalism, on the other hand, is way less coherent, because whiteness is an amorphous
and fairly recent social construct.
At the time of the Roman Empire, different ethnic groups living in Europe would never
have recognized themselves as belonging to the same race.
To ancient Romans, Gauls, Saxons, and Celts, the idea that all Europeans belonged to one
people would have been about as palatable then as the idea that Africans and Europeans
belonged to the same race is to contemporary, um, meme-based alternative ethnocentrists?
But the Golden One mixes Nordic, Celtic, and Greco-Roman imagery together, as if all
historical European ethnicities are interchangeable.
But this is a fictional unification that only makes sense under the relatively modern concept
of whiteness.
And if you unweave that fictional unity, it becomes pretty hard to take seriously the
utopian vision of a unified white nation.
As recently as the 20th century, Irish people were treated as a kind of racial underclass
in England and the US, and Nazi race theory divided the European race into at least five
sub-races of which only the Nordic race were considered the master race.
So what makes white nationalists think that these kinds of race conflicts won't re-emerge
in a new white ethnostate obsessed with racial purity?
And all this is to say nothing of the fact that having even the purest European ancestry
is still not enough to guarantee your membership in the category of whiteness.
If you're Jewish, you're out.
If you're a race traitor, you're out.
If you're a degenerate beta-leftist pleb-tier sub-human dog, you're out.
Because being a good white person also apparently involves doing squats and not taking drugs
or masturbating, which is all part of what the Golden One calls race of spirit.
The race of spirit, as it were.
So all whites obviously aren't equal, and I don't want anyone to think that I love
all whites so much just because the way they're born.
There are sub-humans of all races, to quote Joseph Goebbels.
This is all so convoluted and abstract.
It seems like what white nationalists really care about is the idea of whiteness, not actual
white people, most of whom they seem not to regard very highly.
There are plenty of sub-human degenerate pleb-tier whites such as this guy right here.
Here you can see, oh this is a white guy, but you can also see on him that he is inferior
when it comes to the spirit.
I fucked an Argonian.
And this brings us nicely to our next topic.
Part 4.
How to fuck an Argonian.
As a trans woman.
Part 4.
White genocide.
So the central idea of modern white nationalist theory is that white people need their own
ethnostates in order to prevent something called white genocide.
So what the fuck is white genocide?
Well genocide is usually defined as the attempt to exterminate an entire ethnic or religious
group.
But white nationalists use the term to refer to the immigration of non-white people into
majority white nations.
So you can see how that's not really genocide, because instead of people being killed, it's
just like, there's more of a different group of people being...
Man, this is so fucking stupid I don't even know how to start arguing with it.
Well look, one way we could think of this is in terms of historical genocides that began
with new migrants.
So for instance, the Europeans who settled North America took over native land, they
killed and enslaved native populations, they forcibly imposed their own government and
religion, and that's what a genocide looks like.
So the question to ask is, are Muslim or Hispanic immigrants killing and enslaving millions
of whites?
Or forcing whites to convert to their religions and speak their language at gunpoint?
No.
They're not.
Basically the fear of white genocide is the unfounded fear that non-white people are going
to treat whites as badly as they've historically treated others.
Now I want to reiterate that it seems like what white nationalists are really worried
about defending isn't actual white people, but the idea of whiteness.
And things like race mixing threaten that idea.
Miscegenation doesn't muddy anyone's blood.
That's just not an actual thing.
What it muddies is the already pretty sketchy concept of whiteness.
And I should say that if I really thought that American or Swedish culture was dying
out, I actually would be kind of sad about it.
If the English language for instance was in decline I'd say, yeah we should do something
to save it.
But what's happening is exactly the opposite.
I mean European and especially anglophone culture is the most dominant in the entire
world.
English is spoken all over India and Africa, it's taught in Chinese schools, it's the
lingua franca of the internet.
So this whole thing is preposterous.
You're taking the most dominant and the most imperialistic culture in the world, and
you're saying this is the one we really need to be worried about.
And that, I mean, god damn, I'm 28 years old, I have a master's degree in philosophy,
why am I arguing on the internet with this golden man?
My cousin is out fighting dragons.
And what do I get?
Nazis.
Part 5.
Concluding Remarks.
White nationalism is an affront to everything good about Western civilization.
Ideas like individual freedom and religious tolerance are the best products of European
political thought.
The white supremacists in practice, the founders of the United States, designed a society capable
of tolerating a diversity of thought, speech, and custom, in a franchise that includes people
of different origins and religions.
White nationalism wants to tear it all down for the sake of some communitarian ethnostate
in which skin color is citizenship and dissent is treason.
White nationalism is therefore incompatible with the values of liberal democracy, to an
extent perhaps only rifled by political Islam, at least in theory.
In practice, white nationalist ideas are much more dangerous to liberal values in Western
countries, since they have way more influence here over governments and institutions than
Islamism does.
So I don't care if you wear a suit, if you insist you don't hate other races, or if you
veil your ideas and irony and memes.
White nationalism is wrong, immoral, and nonsensical, and it has no place in liberal societies except
in the way that say, Islamism does, as a kind of fringe test of the limits of toleration.
And the golden one.
If you're watching this, we can't really be friends as long as you're like this, and
I don't expect you to ever change your mind.
But I want to say that if you do, well, I'll be waiting for you in some far away tavern
of degeneracy with a horn of mead.
I actually love the Belgians, I'm so sorry.
