Vatican City, capital of the Catholic Church, home to the Pope, owner of impressive collections
of art and history all contained within the borders of the world's smallest country, conveniently
circumnavigatable on foot in only 40 minutes.
Just how did the world end up with this tiny nation?
The short answer is because Mussolini and the long answer is fiendishly complicated
so here's a simplified medium version.
The Popes used to rule a country called the Papal States that covered much of modern day
Italy.
It was during this thousand plus year reign that the Popes constructed St. Peter's Basilica,
the largest church in the world and also built a wall around the base of a hill known
as Vatican upon which St. Peter's stood.
But the Kingdom of Italy next door thought Rome would make an awesome capital for their
country and so conquered the Papal States.
His nation destroyed, the Pope hid behind the walls of Vatican and conflictingly refused
to acknowledge that the Kingdom of Italy existed while simultaneously complaining about being
a prisoner of the Kingdom of Italy which, according to him, didn't exist.
Rather than risk religious civil war by getting rid of the Pope, the Kingdom of Italy decided
to wait him out assuming he'd eventually give up.
But religion is nothing if not obstinate and one, two, three, four, five Popes and sixty
years later nothing had changed.
Which now brings us to Benito Mussolini, the then Prime Minister of Italy who was tired
of listening to the Pope complain to Italian Catholics about his self-imposed imprisonment
so Mussolini thought he could score some political points by striking a deal which looked like
this.
One, Italy gave the land of Vatican to the Pope and two, Italy gave the Pope a bunch
of apology money.
In return the Pope acknowledged that Italy existed and two, the Pope promised to remain
neutral in politics and wars on the off chance that, you know, Mussolini thought this might
be a thing.
The deal was signed and a new country, Vatican City, was born.
And today the tiny nation on a hill has all the things you'd expect of a country, its
own government that makes its own laws that are enforced by its own police who put people
who break them in its own jail.
It also has its own bank and prints its own stamps and issues its own license plates though
only its citizens can drive within its borders presumably because of the terrible terrible
parking and as the true mark of any self-respecting nation it has its own top level domain, .va.
But despite all these national trappings, Vatican City is really not like any other
country.
Hold on to your fancy hat because it's about to get weird.
To understand the Vatican there are two people and two things you need to know about.
The famous Pope, the incredibly confusing Holy See, the country of Vatican City and
along with that the almost completely unknown King of Vatican City.
But first the Pope who gets a throne to sit upon and from which he acts as the bishop
for all the Catholics in Rome.
Actually all bishops in the Catholic Church get their own thrones but because the Bishop
of Rome is also the Pope his throne is special and has its own special name, the Holy See.
Every time a Pope dies or retires there is a sort of game of thrones to see which of
the bishops will next get to occupy the Holy See.
So while Popes come and go the throne is eternal and as such the name the Holy See not only
refers to the throne but also all the rules that make the Catholic Church the Catholic
Church.
When Mussolini crafted that aforementioned deal technically he gave the land of Vatican
City to the Holy See which believe it or not is a legal corporate person in international
law.
Basically every time you hear the words the Holy See think Catholic Church Incorporated
of which the Pope is the CEO.
Now back to the King.
The King of Vatican City has absolute unchecked power within the country's borders and his
presence makes Vatican City one of only six remaining absolute monarchies in the world
including Brunei, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Swaziland.
The King's absolute power is why Vatican City can't join the European Union because only
democracies are allowed.
Though Vatican City does, strictly speaking, have a legislative branch of government staffed
by Cardinals appointed by the Pope, the King of Vatican City can overrule their decisions
at any time for any reason.
So why do you never hear about the King of Vatican City?
Because though King and Pope are two different roles they just happen to be occupied by the
same person at the same time.
Which has the funny consequence that, because the Pope is elected and the King is all powerful
but they're the same guy, it makes Vatican City the world's only elected, non-hereditary
absolute monarchy.
It's this dual role that makes untangling Vatican City so difficult because the Pope,
depending on the situation, acts either as the King of the country of Vatican City or
the Pope of the Holy See.
Got it?
No?
Okay here's an analogy.
A global international company, say Gray Industries, had a CEO who convinced the United States
to give one of its islands to the company which then made the island into a new country,
Graytropolis, with an absolute monarchy as its government and the law that the King of
Graytropolis is by definition the CEO of Gray Industries.
It's pretty obvious at this point that the CEO should move his corporate headquarters
to the new nation so that the laws of the country can benefit the company and the company's
global reach can benefit the country.
As for the man in the middle, sometimes it's good to be the CEO and sometimes it's good
to be the King.
That is essentially Vatican City.
But if you're still confused, don't worry, even other countries can't keep it straight.
For example, the United Nations has the Holy See, the corporation as a member, but not
Vatican City, the actual country.
And the Holy See gives passports to Vatican City citizens that other countries accept
even though those passports come from a company, not a country.
And speaking of Vatican City citizens, they are perhaps the strangest consequence of the
Pope's dual role as religious leader and monarch.
While other countries mint new citizens with the ever popular process of human reproduction,
Vatican City does not.
No one in Vatican City is born a citizen and that's not just because within a rounding
error there are no female Vatican's.
The only way to become a citizen is for the King of Vatican City to appoint you as one
and the King only appoints you a citizen if you work for the Pope who is also the King.
And because the King is all powerful, your citizenship is at his whim.
If you quit your job for the Pope, the King, who is also the Pope, will revoke your citizenship.
These rules mean that Vatican City doesn't have a real permanent population to speak
of.
There are about 500 full citizens which is fewer people than live in single skyscrapers
in many countries.
And all these citizens work for the Holy See as either cardinals or diplomats or the Pope's
bodyguards or other Catholic related jobs.
So it's best to think of Vatican City as a kind of sovereign corporate headquarters that
grants temporary citizenship to its managers rather than as a real city-state like Singapore
which has a self-reproducing population of citizens engaged in a variety of economic
activities, both of which Vatican City lacks.
But in the end, the reason the world cares about Vatican City is not because of the citizens
within its walls but because of the billion members of its church outside of those walls.
you
