Okay, let's try this one more- God damn time.
Oh God, the webcam thing is broken again. I have to do the- ah, Jesus Christ.
Yeah, I gotta re-add the webcam.
Why does technology just not work? Like, I was expecting by 2017 that technology would just work, you know?
But it still doesn't.
Okay, so we're back. We're back.
And...
Alright, I got pop-out chat.
So, so, so, so. Back to where we were. Back to nail polish.
And then after nail polish, we'll try Pokemon and see if that's too much for the goddamn technology.
Alright, hold on. I'm going to re-post Twitter because they wanted me to post it to Twitter again.
But yeah, we'll do nail polish in a second.
I hope you guys are getting a lot of studying done out there or whatever you're doing.
So yeah, what is this? This is, uh...
I don't even know where I got this.
And it's kind of rubbed off. It looks like it's called Spoiled and the color is Bite Me.
No, go with Photo App. I don't want you.
Alright.
And it's tweeted.
Alright.
So, we're going to do nails. And then we're going to look into...
Actually, let's see if I can download the emulator while I'm doing nails.
And hope that doesn't crash. If it crashes again, that's the end. We're saying goodnight.
But hopefully it doesn't.
What's a good Game Boy emulator for PC?
I know OpenEMU is really good for Mac, but I'm on Windows right now.
Okay.
Yeah, Visual Boy Advance. Let's do that.
Visual Boy Advance.
From virus.com.
Sounds reputable.
Oh god, we've got to unpack a zip file. Can we handle this? I don't know.
Extract to... yes.
And now we need to download the Pokemon ROM.
Let's do red or blue. It's not trying to get fancy.
I had blue when I was a kid, so let's do Pokemon Blue ROM.
From virus.com, yes.
Virus.exe, and let's just run that. Yeah, override all antivirus.
Just go ahead and do it.
Fuck it. Trump's president. Fuck it.
Yeah, download all the advertisements too.
Okay, goodnight, Audra. Thanks for being here.
I'm sorry that I sucked at doing this so much.
Yeah, Trump as president is just my excuse for everything I do right now.
It's like, yeah, I'll drink a pint of whiskey and eat an entire shrimp cocktail at 10am.
Trump as president.
Ugh, my head rings.
Extract.
Stop trying to get me to buy the legal version of Winrar.
I'm not buying shit, you pig shit bastards.
Alright, so now what do we do?
We load Visual Boy Advance.
Virus.exe.
Alright, that doesn't seem to be working incredibly well, to be honest.
We'll just wait.
Yeah, it's probably going to end badly.
We know how the last two attempts at playing games have gone.
My assumption is that Visual Boy Advance is going to require less technological capacity than Skyrim or Origin, but who knows.
Let's do the nails in the meantime.
Can we...
There we go.
Oh, wait, no, that didn't really...
Well, yeah, it's just like America is going to end badly. Exactly. Exactly.
Oh my god.
I'm a little bit drunk to be doing this. This is going to come out real bad.
Okay, I just put way too much on.
Oh, whatever. I've got some acetone in qtips, so we're going to fix it.
We could just do talking. That's true.
That's going to be like a dark red metallic color, which I'm getting all over the goddamn place, but I'm going to fix it in a second with qtips.
Okay, I'm just making it worse.
Yeah, I've got acetone, so we're good.
Alright, let's see if I can do this properly.
You guys can't really see what I'm doing, can you?
This is going so badly.
Look what I just did.
Well, I actually wiped it off. It's fine.
What I should do is turn on the...
I should put it on stereo so that I can do this side to side thing when I go from left to right.
Is that good? Okay, let's get rid of the top card, because it actually gives me more control over which side of the microphone I'm talking.
Because I can go over here, and then I can...
I wish I had pop rocks or something to put into my mouth.
You guys are so into this. It's good.
The internet is just endlessly bizarre to me.
Okay, I'm going to put some on the middle finger and hope that it's not a complete disaster, because I suck.
I'm kind of drunk. Okay, that actually didn't go so bad.
I think I probably should do ASMR videos.
Does tapping work? I don't know.
What if I got a makeup brush?
I can hear that.
Maybe I should just do ASMR videos. Why do I talk about politics anyway?
Because I feel I'm pretty good at this.
I don't know why I talk about Donald Trump, because fuck that guy. I could just be doing this and giving people tingles.
Oh my god. I do like the sound of that makeup brush. That's good, right?
Let's try a different brush.
What if... I think this one should be good, right? Oh yeah, that's good.
My next video is not going to be ASMR, but it's pretty funny right now when I'm drunk and it is after midnight.
My nails are not... I'm not making a lot of progress on my nails.
I've got to say, that's been kind of neglected.
This is definitely the after midnight edition.
Oh my god, you're actually getting headphones.
Peaceful transition of capitalism.
Socialist revolution.
It's not really supposed to be lewd. It's not lewd, exactly. It's just supposed to be like an auditory stimulus.
A lot of the times it is on the threshold of lewdness, but that's not really the main point.
Sorry, I just breathed into the microphone. I don't have my popcorn anymore.
How am I naturally lewd?
This is pretty soothing to me, honestly, the sound. I like listening to it out of the headphones.
I don't know why my Gameboy emulator isn't loading, but it's not.
Yeah, the brush is good. The brush is really good.
Okay, I'm going to tell you a story. Are you ready for story time?
Tell me that you're ready.
Okay, I'm going to tell you a story about my friend, who was also my roommate in college, and he was really funny.
So this one time, he went on this date with this girl, and she was kind of like a status climber, even though she was only 19 years old, which was kind of weird.
But at the school I went to, which was like a private school that I went to for free because nepotism and my dad was a teacher there, there were these people there who were there because they were from poor backgrounds, and they got in and they got scholarships, and they really wanted to be part of the upper class.
That's what going to college was to them, and this girl was one of those girls, but she wasn't very experienced in the ways of the world.
So she came over to our house that we all lived in, like way too many people in this house, like way beyond the legal limits of what the fire marshal would allow, and they were just in the living room and they decided to watch movies, and they're drinking beer, watching movies, which is a very normal thing to do.
And at some point she says, like, is this a thing that you, like they were watching some movie that he wanted to watch, you know, like fucking Reservoir Dogs or something, and something she wanted to watch, you know, like fucking The Phantom of the Opera or something, and she says, can you drink beer while watching movies?
And this is like the only thing that we do in this house, so he's like, yeah, yeah you can.
So she has two beers, and she throws up on our floor, because she's a noob, so you know, he like gets the towel and cleans up her vomit and puts her on the couch.
And eventually walks her home, because she's not feeling well, so they get back to her dorm, and she says, I have to tell you something, and he's like, okay, and she says, I'm seeing someone else.
Like in a really dramatic tone of voice, and he's like, oh, and she says, yes, his father is the finest lawyer in all of Zurich.
And he's like, okay, and he says, well, my father is but a poor shoe cobbler.
At which point they proceed to kiss passionately before he leaves her doorstep and ends that romance forever.
It's just one of my favorite stories of all time, because I love the quick widdedness of saying, my father is but a poor shoe cobbler, after he says fucking, she says this shit about the finest lawyer.
Like, what does it mean to be the finest lawyer in all of Zurich?
That sounds like a 19th century thing, I don't think that's a 21st century thing, I don't think there is a finest lawyer in all of Zurich.
Do you want me to tell another story, or should I try to get this emulator to work?
Alright, so let me tell you a story about a time that I got into, so this is a legitimate story that I'm not making up anyway, I got into a fight once on a bridge over a pit of alligators, which I know sounds like total bullshit, but I actually have a very plausible explanation for how this happened.
So, I was in high school, and I played the cello in the orchestra, because look at me, these are our cello playing hands, these are not fighting hands, right?
But the point is, we went on a school orchestra trip, which we had to pay for by selling trash to our neighbors, which I still feel bad about.
You know, like Christmas wreaths or some stupid shit like that.
So we got on a bus to Orlando, we're down there, the parents have chosen the activities, and one of the activities is gator shining.
Which you probably know what it is if you're from Florida, but if you don't, it's a very stupid thing that people, tourists usually I guess, do in Florida.
Where what you do is you shine flashlights in the alligator's eyes, and then you throw hot dogs at them and watch the alligators eat the hot dogs.
And basically, what happened, so what they do is they take you out to this pier, and you walk on this wooden bridge over this swamp land where there's a ton of alligators.
And so we walked out there, and this fucking kid, his name was Matt, and his name really was Matt so it's kind of fucked up that I'm telling you this.
But he was like, instead of throwing the hot dogs at the alligators, he was like putting them down girls' shirts.
Because he was horny and angry and 16 and didn't know any better.
So he was doing that, and then I thought it would be funny to get revenge by putting a hot dog down his pants.
So I came up behind him, and I put a hot dog down his pants, and he turned around and clocked me in the side of the head with a flashlight.
And it wasn't really, I guess calling this a fight is a bit of an exaggeration because I didn't really fight back because I'm not really much of a fighter to be honest.
But there was this, I definitely was smashed in the face with a flashlight, and I definitely reeled back and leaned over the ledge and looked down into a swamp full of hungry alligators.
So that's the story of that. I guess that's kind of a disappointing story fundamentally because there's a story where the description of the story is a lot more interesting than the actual story.
No, I didn't fuck him up. I've never fucked anyone up. I can't even fuck up Nazis now. Which is too bad, maybe I should.
So I've got some good segway stories because I used to be a segway tour guide on the National Mall.
And that turns out to be a pretty disturbing gig actually. It sounds like a lot of fun, but what you have to consider is that when you're a segway tour guide, what you're fundamentally doing is teaching eight people how to operate heffy machinery that they've never operated before, and then just kind of like unleashing them in public.
It is hell. It's not good.
Fortunately I never had anyone really seriously injured on one of my tours, but one of the guys I trained on his first tour, a woman broke her pelvis on the south side of the capitol. Which is in fact horrible.
But I had a woman once who, she was not comfortable on it though to begin with, and it was obvious that her boyfriend or her shitty husband or whatever had talked her into it in the first place, which was a pretty common occurrence.
Man, you learned a lot of like weird shit about like gender relations working in that job, I'm not kidding. Because like so often you would see like, you would have like married couples, and I was supposed to train them to ride segways, and I would say something to the woman, and she would not quite get it, and then her husband would repeat it back in this like imperious tone of voice, and I would just be like watching this fucking relationship dynamic, and just being like fuck.
Like I'm only seeing two hours of these people's lives, but this is like, this is every hour of every day for them. Like this is him like actually, like here's how you load the dishwasher.
Because I mean it's not like this is like the one occasion where like that happens to be what their dynamic is.
So this particular case, this woman like she obviously is like, but she's like she's not just completely submissive, like she's obviously resentful of this motherfucker.
And so sometimes you would have this as a way of like acting against that dynamic is like women would injure themselves on purpose as revenge.
Like it's not exact, like I don't know if it was like ever, I don't know if it was like something they would formulate as like a conscious plan, but you could kind of tell that they wanted it just to fucking get back at their shitty husband.
That's what happened this time, so I trained them to ride this fucking stupid segway.
And she's like obviously not comfortable with it and her husband's like, you're fine honey, you're fine.
And I'm just like, I'm not getting paid enough to deal with this, so we're going.
So $10 an hour for me and we get out on Pennsylvania Avenue, that's the other crazy thing about it is that the first part of the tour is us driving to the middle of Pennsylvania Avenue.
Which is the wide street that runs between the White House and the Capitol building. It's a lot of traffic.
So we're going down the middle of Pennsylvania Avenue, I have like a fucking microphone headset and they have headphones so that I can talk to them while we're in the middle of the road.
And I'm just like, no on your left is the J. Edgar Hoover FBI building. And I had some stupid joke about the building, you know, and everyone's like ha ha ha.
Because they're polite and I'm not getting paid enough.
And at some point this woman just like starts screaming and she's riding out of the bike lane into the middle of the road.
And like if you're going to lose control of the Segway, you should go to the right.
Because that way at least you'll be with traffic that's going in the same direction as you.
But she decides to fucking veer out into the left into oncoming traffic, which is way worse.
So a Segway, the way it works is there's these basically gyroscopes that detect like the direction that your body weight is kind of leaning in.
So to move forward, you lean forward, to move back, you move back or to slow down, you lean back.
And so she's like, I forgot how to stop. And she's just screaming, I forgot how to stop.
She's now in the middle of the street, just like completely out of control, like a rocket with no fins, just blasting off into the distance.
And I'm screaming at her to fucking lean back and she's panicking so she can't do anything.
And she ran into the curb, thank God, before a car hit her.
But like there was like blood coming out of her mouth, there may have been like chipped teeth, I don't know.
So I just like call the people back at the business and I'm like, oops, someone got hurt, come deal with it, I'm continuing my chore now.
But man, like stuff like that, I would have to get pretty drunk at the end of those days because it was like legitimately disturbing.
They were disturbing segway days.
Alright, I've been rubbing on this microphone with this brush for a long time, is it time for a change of pace?
What other AM smart things can I do?
No, having a segway tour in Washington DC is an objectively bad idea, it's really a terrible idea.
Tapping, like tapping on a microphone, I feel like I should put something around it, I don't know.
That's true, people are always, oh, that's kind of interesting.
How's that?
How's that?
This paper towel.
It does work, doesn't it?
It's a retrofitted future, it's not that it's lewd, it's just that they get like spinal tingles from it, from the sound.
I actually have not read any Kropotkin, I've read like very little of the anarchist literature.
I've read a lot of Marxism, and a lot of Marx, a lot of fucking Adorno and all that stuff, but I haven't read that much of the anarchist stuff.
It's not like why be represented in academia is a problem.
You kind of have to go out of your way to read it, and I haven't done that.
Is this tapping good? I don't know. The tapping is like...
I know she would, I wish she were here. You guys like the tapping a lot.
Yeah, I like the paper towel better too. Why don't we twist the lipstick in now, what does that mean?
Like, it doesn't sound like anything.
Yeah, it doesn't sound like anything.
Well, let's try. This one makes kind of, this one might make a good noise. Let's try this.
Hold on, let's try this. This is very ASMR, but let's try the lip smacking thing. I want to try the volume way up, the game way up.
Oh god, those girls make these like mouth noises.
Oh my god. This is, it is lewd. Well, some of the ASMR stuff gets really lewd. I don't know if I'm up for that.
Oh god, it does sound like Undoomed, because Undoomed, he does this. So this is my version of Undoomed, he's like uhhhh.
Basically what it is, it's just speaking really close to the microphone, so it should sound like Christian Bale, Batman.
But that's like how every male actor talks now. They all talk like ASMR people, they're just like mmm.
I'm very masculine because my mouth is so close to the microphone. I hate listening to that shit.
I don't know why, I don't know why this is taking such an ASMR. Because half of you guys are cute ASMR fans, that's why.
I'm so sorry to all the people who wanted us to talk about serious political issues. But I don't know if that's happening on this stream.
I mean maybe, I don't know if someone brings it up. I need pop rocks, that's what I need.
Oh god, there's those mouth noises. It's kind of disturbing isn't it? It makes you sort of angry but it's sort of pleasant.
Yeah I have politics fatigue, I can't stand it anymore man.
Yeah Tyler people ask me that a lot, like what is a good introductory philosophy book. And I honestly don't have something in mind to suggest.
I don't know. I mean for like teenagers, Sophie's World is a good novel that sort of covers the history of Western philosophy but it's very teen oriented. It's not so good for adults.
I mean if you want to dive into reading primary texts, I can suggest ones that are like relatively easy but still, like you know, really.
Do not, yeah don't start with critique of pure reason or you're going to hate philosophy for the rest of your life and you're just going to end up like me so fast.
So I don't know, what about like read some of the basic Plato dialogues, like the Apology. Read Plato's Apology, read the Euthyphro, read Descartes' Discourse on Methods or Meditations, read Hume's Inquiry into Human Understanding, read Bertrand Russell's Problems of Philosophy.
Those are all like pretty accessible texts that are still like classics of the canon. So if the canon is what you want to learn, those are good places to start.
I don't know what to suggest if you want to start with more contemporary stuff or more, if what you want is to get away from the like white male canon then I also don't, I don't know a good place to start.
Because so many contemporary authors are so obscure and difficult to read that I don't even want to fucking read them. So I don't know what to suggest.
Stoicism is fine, I don't know. I mean stoicism is a good and very particular situation. Like if you're a prisoner of war, stoicism is really going to be helpful.
I know some like POWs or fighter pilots used to carry a copy of like Epictetus with them in case they were imprisoned. Because this familiarity with stoicism is so helpful when you're a prisoner and when your life is just shit.
There's so many seras in this room losing track. But yeah if you live in a realm of plenty like most of us do it's not, stoicism is kind of hard to get into because you don't want to let go of all earthly possessions when you have so very very many of them.
Yeah so actually if you're a scientist Hume is actually a good place to start. Because Hume is like he's an 18th century philosopher but he's like very like worried about like causality and like justifying causality. So hold on a second.
There's a long version of this and there's a short version of this but the short version is called An Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding which he published after his longer book didn't sell very well because it was too fucking long and hard to read and no one wants to deal with that fucking shit.
So this one is kind of like a condensed version of his ideas. But I guess basically the idea about the book was he was kind of responding to the like mechanistic metaphysics of his own century and like to Newtonian physics basically with a kind of like philosophical skepticism based on the idea that you don't know.
You can't infer causation from repeated observation which is exactly what science attempts to do. Most in physics you know you formulate a universal law based on the fact that you observe that something seems to always happen this way.
And Hume's like skepticism it's really kind of an extreme skepticism was the idea that you just because you observe the same physical interaction again and again doesn't mean why why can you say that you know that's going to be how it happens in the future.
That's not a he thought it's not like an a priori truth that observing the same thing over and over again means that it's going to happen again.
But ultimately I don't know. This seemed kind of more interesting to me when I was an undergraduate. As an adult it's like yeah but like the same things do happen all over again.
So like who cares. And like ultimately that is the solution to philosophy is like yeah but it doesn't matter. So why do we care.
My philosopher would recommend for a mathematician maybe try reading some of Wittgenstein's philosophy of mathematics.
I think that stuff is pretty interesting.
Why am I talking about philosophy I'm this ASMR voice this is so fucking weird.
I also used to actually be a philosophy professor so this is really extra weird because I'm now taking the philosophy professor thing that I've actually done and I'm making it into some like weird ASMR thing it's kind of fucked up.
Katara what is which part of this is your fetish.
Spitfire that's my favorite question ever is who is the worst philosopher.
I think Hegel is the worst philosopher because he can't write in a way that anyone understands.
But it's not necessarily that his ideas are the worst. Which philosopher has the worst ideas is I guess a more interesting question. I don't know.
Yeah I've watched Philosophy Tube he's really good.
I don't know if Ayn Rand even counts as a philosopher. She's more of a literary figure. I guess she thought she was a philosopher I don't know.
I don't think anyone really reads Zizek honestly. It's kind of interesting to listen to him jabber on about things like movies and things but I don't read his books because they're too long and hard and boring.
Kierkegaard.
Pure ideology.
Yeah with a lot of this stuff that he's always doing. Someone should make Zizek ASMR which is like sniffing and face touching.
Oh my god guys why are we talking about academic philosophy it's like almost one in the morning. We should be enjoying our lives.
I don't know anything about sports statistics apart from the vague stuff that I've picked up from fantasy football that I play just to be friendly.
If your girlfriend wakes up and sees you watching this that's your problem you're going to have to explain it.
What did I enjoy about studying neuroscience. Honestly I just liked learning neuroanatomy. There's nothing very satisfying about learning the structure of your own brain. It's pretty interesting.
I got my own brain scanned too. Let's actually see. Maybe we can bring that up. Let's try to bring up a picture of my brain. And we can do brain ASMR.
Here we go. Hold on just one second.
Hold on just one second.
OK. Can you see this.
Well here's the brain. This is actually these are actually MRI scans of my brain. It's pretty beautiful brain huh.
Well I had the poop emoji saved because it's a very important image. I've got a lot of interesting stuff saved.
We have. I guess we do. If I unmute my desktop then we can turn this down. I got this.
I got a lot of good stuff on here.
All these are all the clips from my last video. Here's my Richard Spencer.
It is funny. You've got to admit that it's funny. It's pretty funny. He's also right about to explain Pepe when he gets punched.
And here's my efforts to play golf.
Oh yeah. The egg bit. Yeah.
So this is like this is some serious ASMR here.
Look at this.
Smashing.
And watch the heel. Watch the heel.
All right. That's enough of that. This is the stream. The stream has gone too far.
Actually your fetish is watching high heels crush things because it is like a genuine fetish. A lot of people are interested in that.
Well I don't think the question is Spencer is I thought it was the opposite because obviously punching Spencer is funny.
That's not what the question was is the question was like whether it was a good idea to punch Nazis in general because I think I think everyone agrees that punching Spencer is funny.
I think it's time to go to bed. I think I'm out of creative energy.
I'm resting on my past laurels with these ball crushing videos.
So I think this has been a good scream stream. I'd like to do this again.
I think I'll see you guys later.
So until next time.
