Hello and welcome. This is my old friend from film school days, Mark I, David McCracken.
Hello.
Savviest of viewers might remember him as Michael Bay.
Yeah, my hair's no wig this time.
Yeah, with the dollar, yeah, whenever in the nostalgic days of earliest and least effort.
Sweet, young, lovely, beautiful, Michael Bay.
But I still have the Michael Bay thing that I hold to this day.
You were actually one of the first Michael Bay apologists I think I ever met.
Yeah, I think so, yeah, because coming to film school it was, you know, everybody likes their auteurs
and you and I both said we like helicopters at sunset.
Yeah, helicopters at sunset.
So we bonded, yeah.
I asked David to come on so we could talk about screenwriting and micro-budget filmmaking
because he is in the very last processes of finishing his solo directorial feature film, Bullet County.
Yeah.
It's not something we can erase.
I saw a lion there.
In all the wet ferns and moss.
Is blood black in the moonlight.
Can you give us the, as we were taught...
Elevator pitch.
Elevator pitch.
The power drill pitch.
The pitch that you have to go in between drills.
Yeah.
Yeah, it's basically, it's an action thriller that is about four friends on the Kentucky bourbon trail in the 70s.
They're trying to relive the good old days.
They did the trail ten years ago in college.
And so one of them's getting married.
So his best man says, hey, why don't we do it again and actually finish it?
Because we didn't finish it last time.
But there's, along the way they discover that there's buried Prohibition money out in Kentucky somewhere.
So they go looking for that.
And as is wont to do with characters finding money, you know, they start getting greedy and tearing each other apart and that kind of thing.
But it's very, I mean, the term gets thrown around a lot, but it is very Coen Brothers-y in terms of it's funny.
It's black humor.
You know, you get some moments of violence.
And so we've kind of pitched it as the Shining meets No Country for Old Men.
Right now they're running a Kickstarter.
Can you give us the sales pitch?
Yeah.
So the Kickstarter is for finishing funds.
So like you said, we're pretty much done.
But the Kickstarter is to get us final color correction, you know, final VFX and that kind of thing.
So like we're having a poster done by Akiko who did It Follows and Blue Ruin and that kind of thing.
So it's basically to help us complete the film, which we actually have just successfully funded.
But now we're trying to get to, I think, $50,000 so that all backers who contribute $25,000 or more will get a Blu-ray of it.
Yeah, so it's, you know, like anything, as you're making a movie you budget out for certain things.
And then you realize some things are more costly.
So hence finishing funds and Kickstarters and that kind of thing.
What was your budget originally for the actual shooting?
For production only?
That one I don't know.
I think we were trying to aim for the whole movie to be about $200,000.
So the idea was pull as many favors as we could initially and for production.
And we always knew that Kickstarter was a big possibility as for a lot of indie films it is.
But this one we thought we would try to, if we were going to do a Kickstarter, to do it at the end so that we actually had something to show for it.
Instead of, you know, a lot of Kickstarters are the potential for a movie.
You know, help me get it off the ground and the movie most likely won't get finished or even started because it ends up costing more all the complications.
So we thought if we got through production, got through editing, got it far enough along to where it had to be completed,
then the Kickstarter made more sense to incentivize people.
Well, I guess that's sort of the thing though.
I feel like movies are more sure if they're indie.
Because you hear all these horror stories of studio movies that even get greenlit and maybe even start production and then you're like, no, you can't.
Yeah, I think a lot of it must be passion or some kind of drive on the part of the filmmakers.
If they really want to get it done, they'll pull out all the stops and they'll work on it for as long as they possibly can to get it finished.
Well, you have to.
I mean, it's so thankless and it's so competitive.
I think maybe that's true in all arts, but not to demoralize, but it's just like it's so crowded and it's so hard to even be noticed.
Yeah, that's why I think a lot of it has to do with, honestly, talent.
I mean, there's business savvy and there's that kind of thing, but it really is hoping that you can put together a strong enough team that all cares about the project enough to bring it to fruition and, you know, take a hit on their paycheck or be willing to live in a house.
And in this case, in Indiana and Kentucky, which is where we shot it because it takes place in the Bourbon Trail.
But, you know, to kind of rely on people's passion for the material, you know, or passion for power drills.
I think that's a really underrated subject.
Yes.
How did you find your crew?
You know, people that actually give enough of a shit to go through the hell of low budget filmmaking.
Well, there was a long brainwashing process when I put them in a dentist chair.
The drills reminded me of that.
Did you have like the eye drops?
Eye drops.
Yeah.
But, yeah, it was actually a combination of things.
One of them was USC initially.
I did what was called a 546.
You did a 547.
I did a 547.
Yours was the nonfiction.
Mine was the fiction.
Yeah.
I did a documentary.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So on that one, I had a really good crew on that, a really good cast.
And so after working on that, I took the lead actor from that, wrote a feature for him, and the DP from that.
And then through other channels at USC, from professors and that kind of thing, just really, while I was, you know, fully employed elsewhere,
we were putting together this movie, and I was just taking meetings and meeting people through other, you know, USC channels, friends of friends, friends.
So, I mean, a lot of it was trying to find that nice Venn diagram of passion, but not too crazy, but crazy enough to want to leave L.A. for a month.
I just noticed you have a USC ring.
I do.
You know, I got this because, you know, did you get a class ring?
No.
I didn't either because they're like $700.
Yeah.
I was like, I know it's University of Spoiled Children, but come on.
Yeah.
So my day of graduation, the day of walking, we went to the bookstore, and, you know, there's all the class rings and stuff.
And I saw this for like $40 or $50, and I thought, I'll get this, and it'll basically be my wedding ring to my debt.
So when I pay off my debt, I'm going to throw this into Mount Doom and get rid of it.
Yeah, so it always reminds me.
So, actually, that kind of brings me to another discussion point, which is, like, I've talked on this channel about film school before.
Yeah.
That was with a colleague who went to a more vocational school, whereas I had gone to USC, and I hadn't at the time.
At the time, I was a dropout.
Now I'm a graduate almost.
Yeah.
But I guess now the question of film school, would you say it was worth it?
Yeah, it's, you know, I think about that a lot every time my credit card gets hit with more debt payments.
Every time your credit score gets down because your debt is so ballooning.
Ballooning, it's like a tick.
Yeah, you can't tear down the principal, you're just paying off interest.
You don't really know what you didn't know, so you don't really know how much you learned or were absorbed.
And it's also about the relationships.
Like, we wouldn't have met.
I wouldn't have met any, like, the people that worked on this movie.
Like, anybody who worked on this movie that I even met, you know, three people removed from USC, I wouldn't know.
So this crew would be completely different.
The cast would be completely different.
This crew is like, it's a racket.
Yeah, that's right.
I went there.
I sent my kids.
I really shouldn't have filmed in an aviator.
That was a bad call.
But the beauty of nature.
That's right.
Those aren't planes, they're just pterodactyls.
Yeah, no, this is like, your movie was shot outside mostly.
This is outside.
I like nature.
It's like, it's so controllable.
Oh my gosh.
Yeah, we were in a color session the other day, and it was just, the colorist was going...
It was just speckled trees, lighting was all over the place.
This is like an aviary airport.
Oh my gosh, I know.
It's not really either or indie or studio, but I guess one of the questions is why you decided to go almost full indie
instead of either going with a financier or clawing your way up through the studio system,
as some of our other classmates are doing.
I think a lot of it is control.
Like we have control right now.
Yeah, exactly.
This is a metaphor.
This is all post.
Intentional AF.
Yeah, we added the birds and the hammers after we shot.
This was actually really funny.
We're actually like in the middle of nowhere, it's really creepy.
This is green screen, we're improv-ing off nothing, and then we just, yeah, the sirens.
But yeah, I think a lot of it's control in a number of ways, but mostly because ironically, as you know,
in this industry, people don't have a lot of imagination, so you could give them a script,
and you could say like, here's what I want to do, here's exactly this, this, here's the cast, here's everything.
Just throw me 200 grand, which means nothing to a lot of people.
And they would just say no or not get it.
So I think a lot of it is just let's make it, then no imagination, here's the movie.
I mean, it definitely is a starting point, and it's a gamble in a lot of ways, but at the same time,
I don't really know of any other way to do it than using the siren.
Oh wait, I just had a heart attack, that's why they're coming, I'm dead.
Forgot to tell you.
Yeah, it's the studio system coming for us.
If you want it done right, do it yourself, do it with as much control as you can,
and then hope for the best, hope it turns out, but that's like anything, you don't have control ultimately.
But at least you have a movie to show for it instead of a script.
Because I know a lot of times, and I was frustrated with this and a lot of people are,
is you can have a great script that you believe in, but it's even hard to get your friends to read it and get notes.
It feels like homework.
Yeah, because we were talking about this the other day, nobody cares until everybody cares.
And this is something, people please stop asking me to read your scripts and your novels.
It's not cool.
Whenever I say it's skilled labor, it is.
Especially for us, we both have master's degrees.
Asking for feedback, it's time consuming, and it's kind of a job.
There's a reason people get paid for that.
Yeah, it's tough and it's also, you know, a lot of people want to say,
I'm going to work with Spielberg one day, but it is all about your peers and coming up together with your peers.
So, you know, have your friends and people whose opinions you trust.
I mean, yeah, it's great to have somebody with a lot of know-how read something,
but they also don't get your voice as much.
They might not be able to be as prescriptive or as helpful as maybe somebody who knows you better.
But at the end of the day, you're really just fighting a losing battle, trying to get your thing read.
I think it depends on your goal, but I think also it is really hard to get people,
again, if they don't know you, unless they're an agent and they're actively looking,
then yeah, it is totally fighting a losing battle.
Especially in Hollywood, where like you said, people are interested in ideas,
they're not really interested in quality.
Yeah, I mean, I even had a lot of situations when we crewed up for Bullet County where, you know,
I was going to have a meeting with, say, a costume designer or something,
send them the script, have a meeting with them, and they hadn't even read it.
So, you know, at the point that people who you could employ,
especially in a lot of cases it was going to be their first feature as that department head,
and they're not even reading it, you know.
Like, it's tough to get people to read your work, for sure.
Yeah, and it's like, it's not necessarily a reflection on your work,
but I think you need to understand that it's like, while it kind of sucks,
because, you know, it's like you, by the very nature of the creative act,
you have to care way more than is rational.
It's so hard working, like, just working for so long on a thing,
and it's kind of one thing that if you're going to go anywhere,
you have to accept that nobody cares.
Even, like, your mother, like, nobody cares.
Nobody cares.
Until everybody cares.
Right, and they'll care for selfish reasons, for fame or, you know,
for their own betterment or money or something.
But, like, yeah, I mean, even, you know, you find out even running, you know,
like a Kickstarter or something, you're essentially trying to get your cast
and crew to care about getting the movie funded and finished.
And even then, like, the percentage of people that care is a huge drop-off,
and they're all people who worked on the movie and gave, you know,
many months of their lives to it.
So even then, yeah, it's just important to remember that you've been in this bubble,
this creative bubble, and nobody else has that perspective.
Yeah, exactly.
I think that there's maybe a little, it's kind of not really helping anyone,
this sort of, you know, people are going to care because you're special,
when, you know, the reality is people are, you know, like you said, it's selfish.
And there's nothing really wrong with that because, you know,
we all got places to be and people to do, but.
Yeah, it's kind of this weird balance of having perspective on what we're talking about,
of nobody's going to care as much about your work as you are,
but your job is to make them care as much as possible,
like enough to read your work or watch your movie or work on your movie in some degree.
And it is hard, and you're not always going to pull it off, but at least,
I mean, that's how you get a movie made.
You get people to care enough either for money purposes or to further their career
or because they really passionately believe in it.
And, you know, in the indie world, it's not for money,
so you're really fighting an uphill battle to get people who care about whatever you've, you know, written.
So with all that in mind, how do you stay motivated?
Um, alcohol.
I mean, besides that.
Besides the obvious.
Liquid courage.
I have to think that I have something to say,
something to say in a different way than I've seen before.
It's not like reinventing the wheel or anything,
but, you know, you hear a lot of movie pitches like, you know,
like I was saying, The Shining meets No Country for Old Men or whatever it is.
Like, I haven't quite seen that movie, so that's new somewhat.
And I think a lot of it is just, um, believe it.
It sounds hippy-dippy, but believe in yourself.
Like, you really do have to believe in yourself
because there will come points where nobody else will,
and you either use that to keep going or it'll kill you, you know,
or you'll stop doing it.
And, you know, yeah, sometimes it takes realistic expectations
and you think maybe this isn't for me.
But I think a lot of it is I've found,
and I think we've talked about this before,
you kind of get shark-brained a lot and you just don't even think about it.
It's like at the point that you just can do nothing else
and you have to do that,
then there's really no second guessing because you're just doing it.
You're almost the robot.
No, I think that's necessary.
To me it's necessary.
Like, you have to shark-brain sometimes.
And I think a lot of people get hung up on the what will people think.
Yeah, yeah, don't.
And that is, you know, it's like fear is the mind killer.
It's that, you know, don't get hung up on that.
Even if it's just like, is this problematic?
Are people going to hate me?
You know, I mean, don't be a racist, but.
Well, because you're always going to have to defend yourself.
You're always going to have to, you know,
people are going to say take that scene out or it's not worth shooting
or take it out of the movie
or the score should be this way and not that way.
And, you know, yeah, they might present a good case
and you might say, yeah, you know, because you want to field ideas.
But if it's something you really want in there,
for whatever reason, stick to your guns, you know, if you can.
Has that been a process to actually figure out how
or were you always kind of there?
No, it's always a process
because I think a lot of it is you do want to remain open minded enough
to take good ideas.
But you also don't want to lose sight of what it is that you're doing
or what you're trying to say.
For this one, you know, for me being so involved in it,
like I wrote, directed it.
My producing partner and I kind of co-produced it
in terms of, you know, pre-production and that kind of thing
and pulling a lot of our resources.
So we were...
You made that joke about the aviary.
Now I can't stop.
Now I can't, yeah.
I can't unhear it. Sorry.
I just want that dish to be a laser and to shoot.
Just a plane killer, yeah.
Plane killer.
You'll show you to wreck my student film.
This is for YouTube. This is an amateur hour.
I think we're like the kind of defending yourself
versus fielding ideas from other people
really came to fruition in the editorial process.
So when you get to editorial,
you've spent money on certain things.
You've, you know, acted your heart out.
You've written scenes that you really like.
So there were several scenes in it that I wrote.
There was a scene I really liked
and it was a monologue that my character had
and I actually think I acted pretty well in it.
But we cut it out, you know,
because you're like it just doesn't further the movie.
It's slowing it down for pace reasons.
There was another scene that was
one of the most expensive scenes we shot
and we cut it out, you know.
And it's all in service of that movie,
at the end of the day.
So for all those aspiring indie filmmakers out there,
what advice do you have,
now that you're almost on the other side
of having a finished product?
I mean, the advice is simple.
If you believe in it enough,
just really don't stop and do it.
Don't do it.
Don't do it.
I don't need the competition for one.
She's just like,
I don't want to see your white supremacist manifesto,
to be honest.
I've seen enough curb stomping.
Jesus Christ.
Never give up on your dreams.
It's true though.
Because I think the other thing is like,
I think people really have a hard time
with this idea that
the first thing out of the gate
is going to be your breakout
rather than just be,
like you said,
you've already shot a feature before.
You did 546.
You were at USC for several years.
This isn't your first rodeo.
Plus, you actually worked in the industry.
Yeah, it's a lot of it.
I mean, you hate to be so nebulous,
but it is all a learning process.
And I know that, you know,
we've all learned lessons
and made the next movie better.
It may not be a better film overall,
but there may have been things
that you've done better overall.
And it's all a continuum.
And so, like you said,
yeah, your first thing
is not going to be the best,
most likely,
unless you're, you know, some savant.
There's a part of me that wishes
I could find my
Phantom of the Opera fan fiction
from 2001.
Well, at least I can have that right now.
I'm doing a live reading.
Yeah, like we were saying,
you have to believe in yourself.
You have to work really hard,
but you also have to
not think about it too much.
Yeah.
And just go on autopilot
and really work hard.
And that is a skill.
It is hard work.
And I think it's just like,
it's one of those skills that,
you know, it's not like you,
it's not like nirvana,
like you reach it,
like, I'm here.
It's like, you,
it's always kind of a process
to just stay, like, sane
through the process of creating
and, you know,
care way too much
and accept that nobody cares
until everybody cares.
Yeah.
Like, do you know anybody
who's been successful
in this industry
that hasn't worked their ass off?
I don't know of any.
I mean, unless it's...
Yeah, I can think of a few people
who, like, maybe you were,
are legacies.
Yeah, legacy people.
Let's put it that way.
Legacy people maybe didn't work as,
I mean, they think they did, but...
Sure.
Yeah, yeah.
But, I mean, in general,
like, a lot of the people
I've worked with or know
or respect,
I mean, they just worked really hard.
Yeah, like Ryan.
He was always, like, kind of...
Yeah, he worked really hard.
Like, I remember, like,
looking at him and being like,
no, I never could do, like,
you know, just the motivation.
Like, I mean,
I look at his success
and I'm just not really
terribly surprised
just because of, like,
yeah, he was just really,
really high energy.
Yeah.
And I don't feel like
I ever saw him be like...
Really?
I mean, because what is it
that there's that kind of adage
that you make it in this industry
because you just outlast
everybody else, you know?
And you and I both know
a ton of people
who we went to USC with
who aren't in the industry anymore.
They moved back
or they just fell out of love with it
for whatever reason.
Yeah, because I...
Honestly, like,
because I did work in post
for a while like you did
and part of the reason
why I decided
I was going to leave
the industry side of things
and do writing
and YouTube full time
was just because
I didn't have the passion for it,
especially post production,
and I was like,
I can't half-ass two things.
Yeah, and it's not
a sign of failure either.
I mean, I've tried
so many things
that I've had a passion for
and just, eh,
it's not for me, you know,
and there's no harm in it.
Bullitt County will be out
whenever the,
I guess the end
of the festival process.
Yeah.
That could be
another conversation.
Oh my, yeah, yeah.
It's just kind of
seeing where it goes,
but so far,
everybody who's seen it
likes it and it's all
they can hope for.
Well, congratulations
on finishing.
Thank you.
That in and of itself
is like,
y'all ain't even know.
It's a bit, you know,
it's, you know, high five.
Thank you.
Anything buried out there
is meant to stay buried.
David, you're at
Mr. Pictures Film
on Twitter, Instagram,
and Facebook?
Yes.
With your co-producer
and also...
We're getting a YouTube
thing going,
but it's, yeah, slow.
We've been too busy
on this movie.
I know, I know.
We're also on YouPorn.
Just look for us.
Mr. Dishes.
Not Pornhub.
No, not Pornhub.
Because their search interface
is so much better.
Yeah, really.
Yeah.
Come to think of it,
we should get on Pornhub.
Yeah.
What are you doing?
They have better comments.
Also, the link to his
Kickstarter is below.
It's like,
depending on when you see this,
it should be still going
for another couple days
if you want to support
indie film.
Yeah, so if you want
to see some scenes
from the movie
that are almost completed,
go to the update section
in Kickstarter
and there's some
scenes in there.
All right, great.
Well, David,
hopefully we'll be having
a different conversation
five or ten years from now
that we'll look back on this
and laugh at the time
we chatted in the aviary.
I'll still be doing
Michael Bay impressions.
Yeah, we need to get
your dollar sign hat back.
Well, thank you for coming.
Thank you.
