Ha, great play Mark, it's a real...
KILLER!
**Laughter**
**Intro Music**
**Explosion**
Pathologic is one of the best and smartest games that's ever been made.
And you know that's true because no one's played it.
Okay, that's not quite accurate.
A fair amount of people have tried to play it.
The Steam release has achievements
and there's an achievement for surviving the first of the twelve in-game days.
A day lasts about two hours.
According to its global gameplay stats page,
just 13.2% of all players made it that far.
The achievement for day one is called
I'm Not Dead.
It's just that kind of game.
It occupies a certain kind of space in game criticism.
Some game critics, mostly the ones who are...
uh...good,
will sing its praises day and night,
call it the best game you've never played,
argue it's a shining bastion of everything gaming could be but often isn't,
and labor very intensely to explain why games don't have to be fun
to be good.
Journalist, board game critic,
and wizard Quentin Smith
wrote three incredible articles about it in 2008
for Rock Paper Shotgun,
which are probably hugely responsible
for a lot of Western awareness of the game.
But when someone reads articles like these,
they might make the horrendous mistake
of actually trying to play it,
and we all know how that goes, don't we?
The game's just not fun.
It's not interesting to look at.
It doesn't feel good to play mechanically.
It's frustrating.
The story is confusing and wordy
and translated from Russian by a mystical rat
who only speaks in riddles.
It lacks almost anything
that would normally keep a person playing a game,
and yet people keep saying it's great.
I think it's great too.
It's an incredible game
that barely anyone will have the resilience
to actually play long enough to appreciate,
and that's maybe even the point.
So this time on the assorted mess of unrelated concepts
that can scarcely be called a YouTube channel,
I'm going to talk about all the things
I find particularly interesting about this game
and what they bring to making it so unique.
I'm also going to talk about the problems it has
that prevented it from seeing mainstream success
and then give a spirited defense
of half of those problems anyway
in the name of their artistic value.
It's not a bad game.
It's an amazing game, but it's also a bad game.
It's a major time investment too.
In many ways, it's a more interesting game
to discuss than play.
It's possible that Pathologic only exists
so that we may speculate about it.
So in a way, making this video
is really for my benefit more than yours.
I played over 60 hours of this thing.
I have almost 600 gigs
of Pathologic footage on my hard drive.
I get to make a video about it!
That was the deal!
♪ ♪
Part one, what is Pathologic?
Probably should've gone in the intro.
On the surface, it's a very easy game to explain.
Pathologic is a first-person survival horror RPG
with story rich and atmospheric.
Doesn't it look fun?
It's set in a town deep in the Russian steppe
at some ambiguous point in the last 100 years,
and by ambiguous, I mean imaginary.
There are guns, but they're kind of old-timey types.
A lot of the decor ranges from the late 1800s
to early 1900s,
but there's some Baroque-looking buildings lying around.
The town is built around its meat industry,
so there's bowls everywhere, but the abattoir
is some kind of huge ancient building
fused with the earth,
and its workers live in a huge housing complex
that looks nothing like the rest of the town,
and some buildings are actively impossible
like these staircases to nowhere,
and then there's the Polyhedron,
a giant floating tower that cannot be
sticking out of the earth suspended by unknown means
and made partially out of its own blueprints,
so, yeah, I'd say the time period's pretty ambiguous.
You play as one of three different kinds of Doctor
who each arrive in the town for their own reasons
just at the beginning of the outbreak
of a horrible plague that threatens the entire town
and probably the world if it manages to spread.
The Doctors have 12 days to get their shit together,
save the town,
and somehow survive long enough to do that.
In some ways, it's kind of an immersive sim.
You have an inventory, weapons, clothes, and items,
but look at the wording of these items.
It's not food. It's rations.
It's not medicine or healing.
It's drugs, and what is other?
Well, that's where you keep less common stuff
you can use or sell like hairpins and bracelets
and flowers you picked, and are those human organs?
As soon as you hit new game,
it becomes clear that any simple description
of its basic genre conventions
doesn't capture how the game actually feels.
The three playable characters,
the Bachelor, the Haruspex, and the Changeling,
aren't simply chosen by a menu.
So it's all about trickery to you?
Wherever have you come from?
No. No.
I detest trickery,
but if we ourselves are to suffer deception,
our hands are no longer tied.
Where are we?
We open in a theater,
which you actually visit in the game world later,
looking down on all three characters
as they argue on stage over who is best suited
to solving the problem.
I can do miracles.
Just let me.
Will you please be quiet?
The dialogue gets across each character's basic viewpoint.
It's also written in a strangely theatrical way.
The truth is my shepherd.
I will perform the operation.
Medica morbo adhibe.
Don't you go all bossy on me, clever clogs.
This calls for the gentle hand of a surgeon.
Your gentle hands are used to killing,
not giving life.
You will inevitably do harm.
As for Brainy,
he has no regard for casualties at all.
It sounds written.
It's not even trying to be natural.
It's like you're watching bad actors
stumbling through their lines
while rehearsing for a play,
which you are.
The actual play is about to begin
with you playing as one of them.
They conclude they can't work together
and time is of the essence,
and the house lights go down.
We won't ever get along.
I suggest we be on our way.
The sooner the better.
Off we go then?
Let's go.
The clock is ticking.
When you go to leave the theater,
then you get to choose which one you play.
Even before the game started,
the presentation is strangely off-kilter
and brings in ideas of performance
and the theatrical.
It's definitely the weirdest character selection process
I've ever experienced.
You can't play as the changeling
until you've finished the game
as one of the first two,
but frankly, if you're actually going
to play the game more than once,
you should play both of the first two first
and really you ought to start with The Bachelor.
He's regarded as the default pathologic experience.
He's slightly easier,
and his character is an outsider from the town,
so you learn more about it from that perspective,
and that's really helpful.
The Bachelor, Daniil Dankovsky,
is a bachelor of medicine
and is working on the ultimate utopian project
a doctor can aspire to,
defeating death itself.
It's not going well.
The powers that be, and the government I guess,
are shutting down his lab
unless he can come up with something substantive
to back up his ideas.
He's come to the town because he's heard
that a man who lives there, Simon Cain,
has lived a remarkably long life,
so maybe he can learn something
about defeating death from him.
Your quest log has the main mission for that day,
the side quests for that day,
and your overall mission,
which for The Bachelor is saving his career
and maybe all human life
by learning how to defeat death from Simon.
So you go to meet him,
and you learn from Simon's brother Georgie
that he died right before you got there.
Oh.
Well, Georgie asks you to help him find out
who or what killed him.
Luckily, you think you have a lead on how he died
because he met with a town community leader,
Isidor Burakh, right beforehand,
and he was a respected local cultural figure
and the town's head doctor of sorts,
so they might have discussed his health
or who might have wanted him dead.
So you go to meet him, and he's dead too.
People are speculating about a serial killer
or a demonic step creature of myth,
the Shabnackadir, being responsible,
and then you start to notice signs of a plague,
and it becomes clear it probably killed both of them
and is about to kill everyone else.
For days and days, as the lives of people in the town
and your own odds of survival get worse and worse,
that original quest,
Dankovsky's bright-eyed, naive mission
to defeat death itself on his way to meet a dead man,
will stare you in the face every time you open your menu
and check your mission.
For Dankovsky, this message doesn't update
when saving himself or the town become his priority.
For the rest of your sad life,
you have to deal with being reminded
that you came here for something completely unrelated.
So, yeah, get used to that.
Pathologic's not a game about getting answers
or resolutions to your personal quests
or even about being heroic.
It's not a game about feeling safe or having fun.
It's a game about part two,
futility and disempowerment.
You might be wondering why I'm reading the words out
when they're on the screen,
and that's because some people like to listen
to these videos instead of watch them.
I put a lot of effort into my visuals,
but, you know, that's fine.
So I think an important way of explaining
the features and effects of this game
is to talk about the first thing
that'll probably happen to a new player.
You start the game in the house of Eva Yan,
who's letting you sleep upstairs.
She tells you that she's heard noises outside
and there's some strange men hanging out in her garden.
Oh, I know how games work. This is a tutorial quest.
RPGs sometimes have easy early quests
that act as a sort of microcosm of the game,
a tutorial for how various mechanics work.
So you go outside and you're greeted
by these strange boys.
These aren't the characters hanging out in her garden.
These are more tutorial figures.
These are characters that pop up a lot in the game,
tragedians and executors.
These are their costumes.
They're actors at the local theater
performing plays and so on,
but executors also perform important roles
during the plague, like getting posted up
outside the houses of important sick people
to relay messages.
Given that the game is already being framed
as one large theater performance
with you as an actor,
sometimes they break the fourth wall,
like right now where they're telling you,
a living human person,
how to live in the world.
These characters teach you how the basic mechanics work.
Time advances no matter what,
so if you don't do the important things
you're supposed to be doing,
other people will have to do them for you
and might get sick,
and you might need them not to get sick,
so maybe don't let that happen.
Your reputation is important,
so don't start too many fights.
Eat food so you don't starve and die,
and so on.
This game came out in, like, 2004,
so the idea of having to eat to not die
and time mechanics was actually pretty unique
for the time.
This is executed in an awesome way.
Look at how this tutorial is framed.
This conversation won't take too much of your time,
especially since time stops during dialogues,
and our dialogue is extremely important.
You need to know how to play, after all.
What are you talking about?
I'm neither a gambler nor an actor.
He doesn't understand what the Tragedian means by play.
The Tragedian is talking past him to you
so that you know the mechanics,
but the Bachelor has no idea why someone's telling him this.
Need I remind a wise man like you
of the fact hunger is sated with food?
Food can be found in shops.
The Bachelor is having the weirdest conversation
of his life.
The fourth wall-breaking stuff in this game
is genuinely the best.
Anyway, what's next?
Ah, yes, the side quest.
So you go around to see about the men in Eva's garden
and get a cutscene showing them,
and you realize one of them is a creepy-looking,
inhuman worm-man.
Great, another thing I'll have to figure out later, I guess.
If you try to make them leave in a threatening way in dialogue,
a fight starts.
The way fights work in this game
is you get beaten to death in a matter of seconds
and the game is over.
♪
Oh.
Oh, jeez.
Hello again, you two.
Ah, no need to be so dramatic.
Actually, no, that's your job, isn't it?
In Pathologic, combat deliberately feels off.
The game has fighting mechanics
in the same sense that a car being driven off a cliff
has flight mechanics.
Punching is slow and plays a random animation
with a different length before the attack actually goes off,
and its range is highly deceptive.
The range enemies have with their attacks
is hard to decipher as well.
It's very swimmy, like there's lag in a single-player game.
You have to learn to intuit exactly when to close in
for your attack to hit
and when to step back and not get killed.
It's quite hard to be good at fighting in this game.
The game does everything it can
to stack the deck against you if you get in a fight.
The muggers who spawn at night open their combat with you
by throwing a knife at your face,
which, no joke, deals, like, 90% of your health
in a single hit.
No one gets distracted by guards once they pick a target.
They just keep going for you
while the guards chase them and hit them in the back,
and they seem to only reliably drop loot
if you're the one who kills them.
You can right-click to trigger a blocking animation,
which is pretty cool.
It doesn't actually do anything, though.
Guns are eventually an option.
They kill in one or two hits,
but bullets are super rare.
They're really expensive, and you have a tendency to miss
even when you're pointing the gun right at someone's head.
I don't know. It just feels a little weird,
but this actually works in the context of the gameplay
because it further disincentivizes you
in doing combat because even sure bets,
like bringing a gun to a knife fight,
are never really that sure.
Fighting always feels like a risk,
and it instills that you're not really supposed
to live through this game while getting in tons of fights.
You're never handed satisfaction or enjoyment from fighting,
which normally is the sort of thing
that's the most visceral part of a game experience.
The game knows this, too, and likes to throw challenges
designed to hurt you and not be satisfying
right in your face.
Once you're past the point in the game
where you're very likely to have a revolver,
a weapon with six shots,
before a very slow and vulnerable reloading animation,
a side quest pits you against seven guys,
and you have to stand still to open the menu,
which doesn't pause the game,
to unequip it to switch to anything else.
It's like the creators are laughing at you,
seeing what deliberately weird, difficult thing
they can put in front of you and have you still actually do.
This whole fight is optional,
so really it's your fault if you decide
to try a dozen times to shoot seven people
with a gun with six chambers.
Remember how I said early quests in games
are like a tutorial?
The lesson of this tutorial is you're gonna die
if you make bad decisions.
Heck, you're still probably gonna die
if you make good decisions.
Fighting is hard and punishing,
especially against more than one person,
and realistically you wouldn't be seeking out
fights like this.
You should be trying not to get killed first.
A two-on-one fight in the first two minutes of the game
before you know all the quirks of its combat
is a death sentence, and the developers know it.
They put this fight in here to teach the player lessons
about how they should be thinking
about the idea of fighting
or on the whole taking unnecessary risks.
Death is cheap and your health is expensive.
I mean that literally, too.
How do you get health back?
Simple, just rest in a bed for a few hours and...
Oh.
No, that does nothing.
Actually, it just made everything worse.
My hunger meter's gone up now.
Okay, I'll eat an egg and...
Oh, no, that's not gonna close my wounds.
It's an egg.
It made my hunger go down,
but wait, it only made it go down a tiny amount,
and that was all the food I could afford.
Oh, I'm fucked.
The only reliable way to heal
is to take a painkiller like Meridorm or Novocaine.
These are expensive, but they cause you to regain health
over the course of a few in-game hours
which is agonizingly slow, but it works.
They also cause a lot of exhaustion
which also raises over time while you're awake
and causes you health damage if it maxes out
just like hunger.
There are items that heal you without any downsides,
tourniquets and bandages,
but they don't heal you that much.
They're pretty hard to acquire,
and they're worth enough money
that you might as well just sell them
and buy some more delicious eggs.
Basically, in this game, taking damage hurts.
After retrying a few times,
if you manage to kill the two people in this fight,
the items they drop are barely worth
the health you lost to get them.
You get a couple of bullets,
like literally a handful,
and you don't even have a gun to use them with yet.
If you used the weapon you started with in the fight,
your scalpel, it's taken durability damage
and is now already less effective,
and you'll have to pay to get that repaired.
Oh, yeah, weapons lose durability
and effectiveness in this game,
and they do it super fast.
This fight is barely worth doing.
When I was playing, I just reloaded
and let the guys get on with whatever they were doing.
They're on the run from the law.
Whatever. They'll be on their way soon.
It's their problem, and they're not interested
in you or Eva anyways.
You can even ask them what the deal is with this guy.
He's just one of the locals.
Some of the people of this culture
are just physically different for some reason.
For me, the canon choice my bachelor made
was to leave these guys alone
and just let them go away.
It's fine. It's not worth it.
This opening is an exercise in disempowerment.
You're not the main character of the story.
I mean, first of all, there's literally two
of the main characters, but on a deeper level,
you're not special,
and sometimes you have to keep your head down to survive.
You are nobody's hero.
Your character's stats page is a really helpful way
of keeping up with all eight
of the chokeholds the game has you in.
Reputation goes down when you start fights,
kill people, or other generally immoral things,
and goes up when you do good things
like in quests or killing muggers
or giving money to the poor
or medicine and alcohol to the sick.
Not to cure them, but to help ease their pain
so they can die in peace.
A pretty morbid way of doing good.
Despite being an RPG where you can get into fights
with anyone you want in the street,
a la Fallout or Elder Scrolls,
the game has a very powerful ability
to strongly incentivize that you don't do whatever you want.
Not only do fights hurt,
but your survival relies on you being accepted by society.
If your reputation is too low,
shopkeepers won't sell to you,
and then you're kind of doomed to starve to death
or to get sick to death or die to death.
Exhaustion just goes up over time
and is reduced by sleeping,
but there are things like raw coffee beans and lemons
which reduce exhaustion and give you more time
to do things other than sleeping,
but lemons increase your hunger
and coffee decreases your health
just like in real life,
but what's immunity and infection?
Well, immunity is your ability to resist the plague.
Kind of? Not really.
When the plague becomes a factor,
if you walk into a cloud of plague
or get touched by a plague carrier
or bitten by a rat, you get the plague.
Your immunity defaults to 50%.
There's expensive medicines you can take
which increase it temporarily,
but these also hurt you to use,
and you have to use quite a few
to raise your meter a useful amount.
If the meter's absurdly high,
and I mean close to 100%,
and you're wearing a couple of clothes
that protect from infection,
if you get hit by the plague,
you might, might not get infected.
It'll just lower your immunity a bunch
so you get infected the next time you touch something.
Hooray!
Hooray!
♪♪
If you get infected,
you start to lose health over time,
and occasionally your camera gets all wobbly and distorted,
and your infection level starts to raise nonstop,
and as it gets higher, the effects will get worse,
and if you get too infected,
some NPCs will try to kill you with fire.
There are antibiotics which decrease your infection level,
but these also hurt you to take
and are also expensive
and don't actually stop the plague once you're infected.
How do you cure the plague?
You can't. Fuck you.
Don't catch the plague, shithead!
That's not really up for discussion, is it?
It's a fucking plague.
Plagues are really bad.
Statistically, in Europe from 1200 to 1800,
roughly 100% of all living people died of the plague.
Okay, there are items that can cure the plague,
but you really want to not be wasting those.
The game's about curing the plague,
so you kind of might want to not use those
on your personal status effects.
If you get infected, either load a save
or prepare to have one extra thing to worry about
for the rest of the entire game.
There's one other important meter
you'll need to keep a close eye on as well.
Time. The clock doesn't wait for you.
Every day has a main quest,
and you have to complete the quest on time
or someone else has to do your job for you,
and they're not as good at your job, so...
The night has come.
The most pressing endeavors of the day
were fulfilled at the expense
of several lives of your bound.
If you don't complete a quest in time,
the story advances without you
and one of your friends gets sick,
which means you won't be able to talk to them
unless you give up some of your medicine at the door
to keep them upright for the day.
Some quest lines take place at certain times, too,
so you need to keep an eye on things and plan ahead.
Between all this and reputation,
the game imposes a horrible feeling of dread on the player,
a pressure that never really lets off.
There are so many things to manage, to think about,
just to stay alive,
and that's not even getting into the story
you're trying to progress while you do all this.
You're always on the clock
and almost always need to be in two places at once,
and as you navigate the town
to get where you're supposed to be going,
you get more and more aware of how slowly you walk.
♪♪
You can't run.
♪♪
It's just this.
It's horrible.
You're not a character in a fun RPG.
You're a person traveling
at frustratingly person-like speeds
trying to outrun about eight different ways of dying.
This is one of the first truly divisive things about the game.
The walk speed is slow,
and most of the game is about walking from place to place,
walking to buy food, walking to buy medicine,
walking to the trash can to find things to trade,
walking to talk to people,
and walking to the theater to see it predict
all the walking you're gonna do.
Speaking of the theater, every day after midnight,
they rehearse a new play.
These often comment on what happened that day
or predict the future in quite interesting ways.
People only fear bloodshed
when it's their blood and their shed.
Yeah, that's right. Stay out of my shed.
What the fuck are you talking about?
And as the plague spreads,
you start having to either take longer routes
to avoid infected districts
or start risking infection and having to load saves
and lose even more time.
This is not fun or pretty.
It's just walking.
I've had people tell me that walking is what turned them off.
It takes so long to get anywhere.
Even if you're not in immediate danger
because things are going well,
you're still giving up a lot of your time going places,
and the clock is still ticking down,
so you're always racing,
and you're always racing slowly.
But this is also the point of the game in Microcosm.
It's not supposed to be fun on its own.
Here's a head-scratcher.
Are games supposed to be fun?
Maybe, but should they always be?
Is that the only reaction games can
or should explore creating in their players?
Well, I think it's useful to at least experiment.
This boredom isn't a bug.
It's a feature.
It adds even further to this sense of disempowerment.
It also has a profound emotional effect.
As you get increasingly aware of your impending doom
and how limited your abilities to get things done really are,
even walking around becomes tense and stressful.
Pathologic is the subtlest survival horror experience
I've ever played.
The act of standing still in the game makes me nervous.
I'm wasting time.
Oh, shit, it's 3 o'clock. I have to be somewhere.
After a while, even the process of the travel
starts to really get its hooks in you.
Once you get used to it, there's nothing quite like it.
As the story deepens and becomes more complex,
the travel becomes an opportunity
to think about what's happening.
If you're being played,
why you're being asked to do this,
who it really benefits,
whether someone's messing you around to waste your time
and stop you figuring out what's really going on.
The walking becomes the most engaging thing in the world.
I've never been more alone with my own thoughts
than when I was playing Pathologic.
I'm one of the two remaining defenders of No Man's Sky.
The others were lost in the Great Purge,
but when it came out, I liked it at the time
almost primarily because it came closer
than any other game to doing this.
In fact, I made a reference to Pathologic
in my little video about it, but in reality,
Pathologic is still the absolute greatest of this
and puts No Man's Sky to shame,
especially when all the patches made it
much more like what everyone else wanted
and much less like what I had enjoyed.
Man, I should revisit that game.
Imagine a game holding your attention
not because anything in particular is happening
but entirely because it's got inside your head.
Oh, and then, just to make sure you're paying attention,
a plague cloud made of screaming skulls
flies at you and you go,
AHH!
The constant racing against the multitudinous clocks
of time, exhaustion, and hunger,
trying to get enough surplus stuff done
to afford to manage it all,
and the many ways you can be killed easily or survive
but with the game made even harder
by taking damage or losing time or getting infected
or getting so desperate you decide to kill a guy
in a dark alley for his food
is the exact opposite of a heroic fantasy story.
At all times, the player feels powerless.
Instead of the player being free,
but with some survival mechanics to keep track of,
it's flipped.
The game is a large collection of things
that will kill you unless you submit yourself
to their whims.
You're free, but you should be doing
what you're supposed to be doing or you'll fail and die.
You're placed under a level of constant stress
maintaining your frail body while racing against time
to actually get anything else done.
You're always technically in control,
but it's hard not to avoid the feeling
that you're the one being played by the game,
constantly reminded of all the things
you don't have time to do,
all the things you need to avoid,
and worrying maybe the game's gonna come up
with something new to stab you with on the next day,
which, uh...
Part 2.2, day two.
I came up with the titles in this video to amuse myself.
I don't really care what you think about them.
Day one is kind of a walk in the park.
You even have enough leeway to take a walk
in some of the parks.
You get used to the basic mechanics,
buy and eat some food, progress the story a little,
and meet some of the other characters,
and at the end you realize that a plague
might be about to hit.
If you manage to survive day one and complete the quest,
well, congratulations.
You've done better than most players,
but the real game hasn't started yet.
Day two is the next big hurdle,
and even less people make it past that.
The Bachelor's day two is where players will decide
if this game is for them or not,
and the drop-offs in terms of achievements
demonstrate this pretty well.
You'll know if the game is something you're going
to try to continue with after this,
so you make it to bed on time
with a decent amount of money prepared
in case you need to buy more things
and with all your meters sufficiently handled.
Maybe everyone's warnings about how hard this game is
were sufficient to prepare you,
and you've got this in the bag now.
♪ ♪
On the morning of day two, prices rise tenfold.
The money you started the game with
is no longer enough to buy a single delicious egg.
The plague hasn't properly hit yet,
but word's got out there's an outbreak coming
and people are stockpiling food and medicine.
Not only is being able to afford food
suddenly a much more pressing question than you expected,
any food you do have on you
doesn't seem like a good idea to eat.
I mean, that's a lot of money you're holding.
To make matters worse,
the town's governor, Alexander Saburov,
won't agree to do anything about the plague
because he'll be seen to be overstepping the mark
if the other rulers of the town
don't agree on there being one.
So a plague is starting,
but no one with the power to take proper action
will help because everyone has their own agenda.
So you spend a good deal of the day
with your hunger rising
and no sure way to solve it
because your money is worthless now
running around trying to find enough proof
to get all three of these groups
to agree there is a plague
and to give Saburov the power
to start making emergency orders.
Your main quest is getting these warring factions
to agree that the obvious problem exists.
Along the way, you pick up two side quests.
In one of them, you meet up with a former buddy of yours,
Andrei Stamatin, and upon agreeing
that the shits hit the fan, or rather the town,
you decide to get out while you can,
but Andrei won't leave without his brother Peter
who doesn't want to leave that much,
but Saburov, the guy who will get emergency powers
anytime soon, bears a long-standing grudge
against Peter which will probably lead
to him getting killed once that happens.
And this isn't unfounded, by the way.
When Saburov does get emergency powers later in the game,
he uses them to try to get Peter killed.
So you need to get proof this is the case
to get Peter to agree to leave with you both,
which you get from talking to Maria Kane,
Simon's niece, about this issue.
However, if you tell her why you need to know this,
she intervenes and prevents either of them
from leaving, failing the quest.
Unbeknownst to you, Maria needs these guys
in the town for her own reasons, so don't do that.
So you go to give this information to Peter.
Ah, fuck!
This is an actual recording
of the first time I saw this statue.
You can see in the footage that I freeze up.
Like, it's terrifying.
This is the second game ever to jump scare me
with a fucking still object.
It's genius.
I can't wait to show you the other one sometime.
That one's great, too.
You know which one I'm talking about.
You all agree to meet at the train station at 10 p.m.,
so you're starving and the town sucks,
but at least you have an escape plan now.
The second side quest is called
The House of the Living.
Several of the town's more charitable people
have decided to establish a shelter
for when the epidemic hits,
and they each give you money to buy some food
for the shelter before the prices rise any further.
I will make the purchases.
I have to do a lot of walking today anyway.
Ah.
The money they give you is not enough
to buy all the food they want,
so you actually have to use whatever spare money you have
or sell some of your items to afford this.
You give up all your remaining money
and items to get food you also need
just to give it away,
and you have to watch your hunger go up
and your time go down as you rush around
trying to find the stores with any bread or meat left.
When you get it all,
you're told the location of the shelter
so you can deliver it.
Let's just break this down.
Part of a quest on a day when food is incredibly scarce
involves carrying a ton of food somewhere
and not eating it.
It's actual torture running around
watching that hunger meter go up
and not knowing how you're going to resolve it
even though you're technically holding a solution
the whole time.
It's awkward and engaging and tense
in a way that no game has achieved before or since.
The game doesn't punish you for eating it either.
You don't have to do this quest.
You can just keep the food
or the money you were given to buy it with
and just ruin the chance to build the shelter,
but you don't because that's hardly what a doctor
would do preparing for the plague,
and maybe there's a reward for doing it
or it helps you further down the line.
You're making a positive moral choice
on a quest in a video game.
You know how this works.
There's something in it for you.
So you go to deliver the food.
♪♪
The house has already been hit by the plague.
Everyone there is sick and dying,
and the plague clouds will actively hunt you
through the house if you stay too long.
There's an executor there who tells you
this mission was obviously a failure,
so you leave and go back to the quest giver
and give her all the food intended for the shelter.
She gives you some nuts to tide you over
as thanks for your hard work.
The reward for successfully following this quest
to the end is dramatically worse
than the money or food you could have just run away with.
At the very least, this quest results
in finding proof of the plague,
so the part of the main quest where you go in search
of a plague-ridden house is at least solved by this too.
If you do the main quest instead, though,
you get a genuinely terrifying encounter
where as soon as you realize you've found a house
filled with women who have the plague,
once you try to leave, it spawns two more
right where you just came from,
and they try to grab you to appeal for help
and give you the plague if they do,
and you just have to dodge past them.
It's genuinely super scary and just emotionally awful.
You're just abandoning these women to die.
It's a horrible nightmare which, thankfully,
you cannot do if you did the house of the living.
Finally, Saburov has the power he needs
to start establishing hospitals under quarantine,
rationing food, distributing medicine, and so on,
and he even gives you a gun,
so it's a day late, but things are finally
where they should have been already,
perhaps too late to prevent a full-on outbreak,
but better than nothing at all.
You can defend yourself a little better now at least.
Luckily, you're getting out of here soon,
so 10 p.m. rolls around.
Your quests have been one major failure
and one minor resolution to a power squabble
that you're sure will heat up again tomorrow,
and you haven't eaten anything,
so you head to the train station.
When you get there, you find guards blocking the trains.
The Somatin brothers are nowhere to be seen.
They just didn't show up, and according to the guards,
no one can enter or leave the town now
because it's under quarantine thanks to the emergency powers
you helped Saburov get.
You just trapped yourself in the town.
If you try to talk your way out,
all the guards attack you,
and you lose reputation for killing them
because these guys were just doing their job.
Best of all, there's an executor standing there.
This one doesn't say anything
and seemingly can't be seen by the other characters.
He just stares at you, letting you know
he knows how dramatic the irony is,
laughing at you for thinking you can just leave the town.
So you're trapped, and you're starving.
In the middle of the night, you go to see a play
being rehearsed at the theater.
The play's about how you're fucked.
Bad news.
The governor will abuse his power.
When the morning hits, the game nonchalantly says,
it all ends in less than ten days.
Exhausted from a day's being a pawn
in someone else's power grab and scrambling for resources
for a quest that was doomed and starving half to death,
you eat one of the nuts.
♪♪
Great. You're completely fucked,
and you're on day three.
Day two is excellent game design.
It's deeply engaging.
Watching your attempts to get anything at all done
get frustrated,
and it also sets a general tone for the game.
It does the special game design trick
that I like to call recontextualizing.
Players come to games with their own expectations
and understandings of how a game is supposed to work
and feel and play,
a certain general set of ideas
about what all this is supposed to be like.
If you're playing an open world RPG,
you know what dialogue trees, shops,
and trading and hunger and time mechanics
and moral choices are,
and you think you know how they work.
Day one partially plays into this.
It takes pains to show how fragile you are
and all the work you have to do to not die,
but it's doable. It makes sense.
It doesn't feel that much different from a normal game.
When the prices rise so massively
that money is effectively worthless
and you were given no warning this would happen,
everything about how you relate to the game experience
is thrown out the window,
and you feel that happening in your brain
as you play and realize what just happened.
Walking around while slowly starving,
getting rid of the rest of your own items
to try to get the food for a doomed quest,
carrying food you can't eat around,
and wondering when you will get to eat,
and watching your meters inevitably rise
as you race to help the town
and only barely achieve anything,
you start to make realizations
about the scope of this experience.
You weren't playing a game with the mechanic
where you have the option of using money to buy things.
You were playing a game about having no money.
You weren't playing a game where you have
to eat food to survive.
You were playing a game about starving.
You weren't playing a game where you can choose
what sort of morals you have.
You were playing a game about how betraying
the people who trust you is better for you
than trying to be a hero, and doing the right thing
is an exercise in getting your time
and energy and money wasted.
Survival horror RPG? Lies.
You are playing a pain simulator.
This is a deeply masterful trick
I've seen very few developers pull,
where commonly understood mechanics
are twisted in such a fashion as to force the player
into a specific mindset and relationship
with those mechanics,
and everything straightforward suddenly becomes
different and off.
Once day two happens,
you no longer have any idea what's coming.
Money turning out to be virtually useless?
The growing threat of the plague?
Who knows how bad things will get in the next few days?
Even though the game doesn't get that much harder,
and technically the game isn't that hard
if you know what you're doing,
this sequence of experiences fills you with dread
for what might happen next,
and the game doesn't stay this difficult forever.
The point isn't how hard the game actually is
if you measure it objectively.
The point here is how the game makes you engage with it.
The game has a reputation of being depressingly punishing
and difficult, and while all this is true in places,
and it does get very hard in brief bursts,
the fact the game manages to create this reputation
without always being that hard
is a serious credit to its execution.
Day two grinds you beneath its heel,
and even if things pick up for you
or you master the art of stabbing bad men
for extra cash,
you'll never really feel in control again,
and that is genius design.
One of the ways you can make surviving slightly easier
is to sell your gun.
The gun you just got is worth a lot of money,
and so are bullets, which might be good
for solving some of the more pressing issues of the game.
You don't get in that many fights,
especially if you're avoiding them,
but being put in a position
where the best chance of survival
is getting rid of one of the main things
a first-person shooter is known for,
it's even in the name, that's a notable thing.
Almost everyone I know who made it this far
sold their first gun,
allowed themselves to remain vulnerable
for the chance to maybe not die of something else.
You can also learn to hold on to certain objects
to trade for better things.
In trash cans, you can find all kinds of stuff.
Sometimes people throw out jewelry
or needles or empty bottles,
which you can refill with water for free
and drink to reduce hunger and increase exhaustion
or save up to trade for bandages with the town drunks.
The children in the town will trade flowers
or nuts or blades for various useful things
like medicine and bullets,
so the nuts you got were useful.
You just might not have learned their value,
and this is another bigly clever thing the game does.
The economy isn't as simple as
I give you money and you give me my delicious egg.
It's a web of needs and wants
from a variety of NPCs
which informs the value of myriad different items
which you can benefit from if you pay attention and learn.
The game never hands any of this to you,
and that makes discovering and using these things
feel good, like you've worked it out
and solved something.
One type of child in the town, this little girl,
sometimes, very rarely,
has an item on her called Shmowda.
They're expensive to trade for, but they're worth it.
If you use it, it reduces your health to almost nothing,
but it cures the plague.
There's a very limited amount of real cures
available throughout the story,
so getting your hands on some of these is a real help.
Even if their downsides are too much for you to risk using,
other people will pay thousands and thousands
of rubles for them, almost $50 worth,
and hey, maybe some of your friends
might need curing later. Just saying.
This all works in the context of the story too.
The Bachelor is in a foreign town
whose customs aren't like the ones he's used to,
and so are you, and all this tension
and storytelling happens largely
while you're just walking from place to place in a town.
It's quite an experience,
and this experience is enhanced by the game's music,
which is some of the best in the business.
It takes a front seat during a lot of the walking,
and it does excellently with that spotlight.
♪ ♪
It's intensely atmospheric and moody,
and when it needs to be, it's strange and unsettling.
♪ ♪
It feels, at the same time, natural and alien,
like you're witnessing a normality
that isn't familiar to you personally.
♪ ♪
Synths are used alongside more naturalistic drums and rhythms
to further destabilize the setting.
The music even evolves with the story.
Each main region of the town has a theme,
and when that area gets infected,
its theme changes and becomes even more strange and distorted.
♪ ♪
On top of the slightly remixed original music,
you can now hear a distant and frenzied chanting.
It's great, and some of the tracks
sound subtly different for different characters,
which is awesome.
The opening theme is a real banger, too.
♪ ♪
Except it sounds oddly familiar.
I can't quite put my finger on it.
Oh.
♪ ♪
Aw, damn it!
Part three, the writing.
By now, if you've been pausing to read the text for some reason,
you'll be very aware of how strange the writing is,
and whenever you begin dialogue with someone,
they actually say something out loud.
When we do not find peace of mind in ourselves,
it is useless to seek it elsewhere.
Truth does not do as much good in the world
as the appearance of truth does evil.
Oh, wow, that's a good quote.
I'm gonna use that in a future video
and pretend a philosopher said it.
Watch out for that.
Everyone's very wordy and flowery,
talking about their dreams and visions,
and sometimes it's hard to tell if you're discussing philosophy
instead of the task at hand.
The game has a very specific writing style,
one more evocative of your typical novel
than other games,
and it is, in my opinion, very well written.
It succeeds in making you feel transported to a world
where things aren't as simple as they seem,
where dream and metaphor are entangled with reality.
If a sentence feels strange or hard to follow,
it's doing that on purpose to make you feel weird,
like you have to put effort into understanding.
Instead of simply telling you you're a small part
of a strange universe,
it makes you feel that way
by refusing to pull its punches
with the ideas it's meditating on.
Try this on for size.
Do you believe in prophecies, Andres de Matin?
It depends.
I agree this may seem inconsistent with materialism.
On the other hand,
when your own experience convinces you to their effectiveness,
you have to take them into account.
I wonder that myself.
For a moment, I thought he was driven
by the same feeling that I am.
A great man, when unexpectedly betrayed
by the people he loves,
will often seek to fill the whole universe
with his blind spite.
Yes, the feeling is indeed familiar.
No one talks out loud like this in real life,
but that's not a mistake.
It's part of the point.
You're stuck in a world where people do talk like that
and have to untangle it to make sense of things.
It's very hard to call this game pretentious
because not only does pretentious mean
affecting a greater importance than is actually possessed,
and the game definitely does say important things,
but it's also too self-aware about how all this looks,
and it loves to make fun of itself.
The plays make fun of the characters
and plot and writing style.
The cool fourth-wall-breaking executors
complain about how unwieldy their outfits are.
It's lovely stuff.
While this video is definitely going to spoil
lots of the plot,
there's lots of really interesting aspects
I won't have time to go into detail about.
If you want a more complete breakdown
and analysis of the three characters' stories,
YouTuber Sulmatul made a great video doing so
linked in the description.
There's such a ridiculous amount of depth and complexity
that it still astounds me now,
and even trying to cover all of it is beyond my powers.
When I was talking about this with Mandalore Gaming,
whose video on Pathologic is also really worth checking out,
he offhand mentioned an entire aspect
of one of the characters I'd completely forgotten about
and isn't even in Sul's video either.
This game is about as dense with story
as a real novel with an equivalent amount
of words to read.
Obviously, really getting across
the cumulative feel of the writing style
is hard to do in video form,
and I was never really good at book reports anyway,
so instead I'll talk about some of the more specific
storytelling techniques that help the game achieve
what it's going for.
Firstly, the constant use of deception.
Other characters lie to you for all kinds of reasons
or have access to incomplete information
and then share it unreliably.
There's lots of manipulation and hearsay going on,
and it's left to you to figure out
what's actually happening.
Every character in this game has their own end.
Why does Maria Kane want to keep the Stamatins in town?
Why does the Inquisitor seem to always want
to investigate the Polyhedron
and find an excuse to destroy it?
Did Olgimsky lock up the termitary
to prevent the plague getting in
or has it already struck the place
and he was trying to prevent it spreading out?
Are his complaints that you should be looking
into the Kanes' business first
a genuine concern for their power plays,
or is he just trying to get you out of his hair
by pretending to be?
This goes the other way as well, of course.
Sometimes you can play dumb to learn more about someone
than they'd let on if they thought
you weren't on their side,
and sometimes you can lie for your own benefit,
like you can get a second pistol
if you tell Andrei you don't have one when he asks you.
Figuring out and catching someone in a lie
or successfully lying to someone else
feels great because you really are gaining ground
in a struggle for truth and control.
It's very engaging getting lied to by a story
and having to put the pieces together yourself.
Secondly, there's the way you experience
the same overall story
from three very different perspectives.
The Bachelor, for example,
is a clever and rational-minded man,
but he's so obsessed with pursuing
his specific lines of inquiry
that he spends a lot of time getting tricked
into doing busy work or ignoring the real story,
and when he is trying, he can be pretty bad at it.
He's an outsider, but rather than working
to gain people's trust and get on a decent footing,
the player's text options relate that the character
they're inhabiting can be a total asshole,
but could I please offer you a piece of advice?
I need no advice.
I mean, look at this choice.
This is something The Bachelor thought to say.
You're supposed to be asking this guy for help, Daniel.
What the fuck are you doing?
Several characters in the story have the power
to predict the future,
and The Bachelor has the power
to be a dismissive piece of shit to all of them.
The Bachelor says things that he must think
in his head sound really cool,
but to say to another person is, like, super weird.
You are broken, Lara.
I, on the other hand, am used to winning.
At numerous points in the game,
you can just randomly say a Latin phrase
to try and sound clever.
Medica morbo adhibe.
Asperty lies to The Bachelor about who's responsible
for the town's water supply being destroyed,
but the guy who actually did it just made a mistake.
She's buying time for him to get to safety
by sending you on a wild goose chase
because she rightfully believes The Bachelor
will try to fucking kill the guy if he gets the chance.
The Bachelor is such a piece of shit.
Look how he talks to this poor woman.
This is incredible characterization.
Like, you're just stuck in the body
of this pretentious buffoon. It's great.
In conversation with the Haruspex,
Asperty casually refers to The Bachelor
as the prickly prick that'll bury us all.
Bachelor's plot is largely a struggle to do
what seems obvious to him with his degree in medicine
but which conflict with the values
of the people of the town.
He wants to inspect Simon's body,
but the Kains have a family ritual
where bodies are left unobserved for 24 hours.
Then later he wants to dissect an infected body
to study the plague, but the local culture
forbids any kind of defilement of the body,
including surgery and autopsies.
It's a special right given only
to special families of medicine men, the Menkhu.
The Bachelor spends multiple days
literally and figuratively fighting
the people he's trying to save
to the point of getting arrested,
attempting to subvert their laws
so he can help sort things out.
By the end of this, Dankowski has a very low opinion
of the townspeople and their traditions
and decides he has to work within them
to get anything done and turns to someone
who can do the things he can't.
Over the course of his story,
Dankowski finds himself siding with the characters
who appeal the most to his belief system
about the world and against the more folksy wisdom
of the Haruspex and the supposed miracle working
of the Changeling.
All three characters play through
the same 12 days, and these stories aren't separate.
Whichever character you play,
the other characters are dropped in the world too
and follow their stories as well.
You even interact with them as part of your story.
You cross paths with the other characters quite a lot,
but you never really have an understanding
of what the other character's path is.
Early on, it sounds like the Haruspex is responsible
for the deaths of both Simon and Isidore,
though some people vouch for his innocence,
but then you find out that Isidore is his father.
Would he really just kill his dad like that?
But then it turns out the plague
might have killed those people,
as far as you know anyway,
but people seem to be saying he's going around
killing people now.
They're calling him the Ripper.
I'd wondered if maybe you play a serial killer in his plot.
When you talk to him, he seems reasonable
and like he's trying to make a cure
for the plague, a panacea,
but both you and Dankowski seem wary of his methods.
He's using a kind of medicine that seems kind of folksy
and a bit made up, so you kind of ignore it.
He's got his own shit to deal with,
something about a guy called Foreman Oyun
and what a big problem he poses.
Dankowski never even meets that guy, whoever he is,
but because he's a trusted member of this culture,
you need him to do some stuff for you.
For part of the main plot, you have to help
break him out of a prison to help you
because the governor doesn't believe he's innocent
of all the shit he's heard about him at this point.
Basically, when you're playing as the Bachelor,
the Haruspex seems a whole lot like a dangerous weirdo
whose help you happen to need,
but when you're playing as the Haruspex,
his side of the story actually starts to make sense,
and that kind of asymmetrical storytelling
isn't something you tend to get in video games.
In keeping with the unsettling
and anxiety-inducing design of the rest of the mechanics,
the game's dialogue system deliberately frustrates
your ability to fully understand the story too.
When you're talking to someone, you often have the chance
to ask questions or make observations,
but often in a chain of dialogue you can't come back to.
There aren't really dialogue trees here.
You ask one of several things, and that's your lot.
Sometimes dialogue choices exit out of the conversation
with no way to go back and progress it.
The only way to learn absolutely everything you can
is to load a lot of quick saves around dialogue
or try to only ask questions
you think you don't already know the answer to.
There is absolutely no way this wasn't intentional.
The game wants you to feel trapped in dialogue,
so you have to think carefully about what to ask
and if you can trust those answers to ever learn anything,
and you can't go back and ask the other
without the inconvenience of loading a save.
You have to figure out what thing your character should say
which won't end the talking if you want to learn more
about what's going on, so you learn to talk manipulatively
instead of truthfully.
Do you really need to tell someone
you think their idea is bad when you can play along
and learn more?
It makes even dialogue somewhat tense,
uncertain what option will end the talking.
Take into account it's possible to fail quests
by saying the wrong thing,
and you have a great system nestled precisely
in the fact it seems unforgiving and incomplete.
The system only feels bad if you're trained to expect
to be able to go back and learn everything you want,
but as we've just spent over 40 minutes covering,
the game's about not getting what you want
and hating people for it.
One thing that complicates discussions of the writing
is the fact that the game has had
two English translations now.
The first, which came out when the game was released overseas
in 2005, was notoriously so strange
that some sections of the game are borderline impossible
to understand without a guide or a philosophy degree,
and some sections were even taken out completely
for foreign releases because they just didn't make sense.
The HD remaster has a new, improved translation
and has the cut parts put back in.
It also has new voice recordings,
which is good because the last ones weren't great.
Your sensitive hands kill more often than present life.
You will inevitably cause harm,
and this smartass won't consider the losses at all.
You both lack mercy.
See, that's just not fitting at all.
The Changeling is an ambiguously magical little girl,
not an evil, elderly crone witch.
Simon, the land has cast out a monster
from the bowels to bridle his impudence.
Katharina. Oh, sorry, she's Katharina in this version.
Is one of those clairvoyants I mentioned earlier,
but she's also whacked out on morphine most of the time.
This voice really isn't appropriate for her.
I need morphine.
Yeah, that's better.
The new vocalists are much more fitting
and better directed, too.
They would have had to re-record the vocals anyway
because the translation they were going from was pretty bad.
For example, there's a cultural term
the Haruspex uses a lot to refer to the Bachelor,
uh, oinon.
Go, oinon.
I need time to pick up my tools.
Um, the original vocalizations,
well, they're left a little bit to be desired.
Go, onion.
I need to collect the tools.
This epidemic acts as if it has a mind of its own.
This disease behaves as though it has a mind of its own.
Yeah, see, maybe they forgot to delete a sentence there.
I don't know.
Traces of the supernatural are found more often
than most reasonable and wise people would like.
Mmm, not really feeling it.
Chimeras that had been...
Ha ha ha ha!
Chimeras worship...
Okay, that's a little better.
That sounds like it might even be a way of saying it.
It's Chimera, right?
Oh, God, I don't even know anymore how to pronounce...
Chimera. Please be Chimera.
Chimera.
What? WHAT?!
Screwed this one up.
Needs fixing.
That is not how you pronounce Chimera.
It sounds like someone machine-translated
the original Russian script into English
then went through doing right-click thesaurus
to make it sound smarter.
It's tough to pass and it really throws me off.
Every time a character's side of a conversation
turns out to be three lines of this kind of text,
my brain groans at me and I have to pause for a sec
to mentally prepare to read it.
The game's weird writing was like that
in the original game too.
Russians don't walk around talking like this.
This is just how it was written.
I originally thought this line in the old translation,
immortal dragon, was weird,
like they were trying to refer to Simon
as a mythological creature
but accidentally refer to him as a creature
that we have a lot of visual connotations for.
The new one says Leviathan,
which seems more appropriate.
If you call someone a Leviathan,
it sounds metaphorical and less literal,
but I checked and the original Russian version
calls him an immortal dragon too,
and dragon doesn't have any special metaphorical meaning
in Russian. It just means dragon.
It's just a weirdly written game
that the old translation makes even weirder
by taking it way too literally,
but there's an interesting intersection going on here.
You see, while the translation is improved,
at least in my opinion, the sense of strangeness
in the unforgiving and alien culture
of the strange town was completely intended.
Some people actually defend the older translation
for adding to this feel.
Like, some people will actually say
that the worst translation is better
at getting across the feel the game is going for.
Now, we're gonna get into some subjective territory here.
We're gonna have to peel away a few layers
of the onion of interpretation,
but while I can see that argument, I...
Phony! You're a fucking phony!
Okay, fine.
I have something embarrassing to admit
about my relationship with this game,
which really throws my pretentious hipster credentials
into question.
You telling him you're a phony yet?
Yeah, I'm doing it now.
Are you doing it?
Y-y-yeah, I'm doing it.
Are you doing it?
Get out of my fucking video!
You see, I have two failed prior attempts
to make it through this game.
In 2013, I found the Rock Paper Shotgun articles
by Quentin Smith, hallowed be his name,
and found them really convincing on the subject
of how games could be.
They really opened my eyes and changed
how I think about gaming,
so I decided to try the game for myself.
The original translation bounced me right off.
It was a little too much for me to want to sit down
and put time into when I bought it in 2013
and had a degree to pretend to work for
and Gundam to watch,
and I actually took a picture on my phone
of the funniest thing about this experience,
which was when the most understandable sentence
I'd read so far was a character apologizing
for if they don't make much sense.
I was like, yeah, thanks,
so I stopped.
Then a couple of years later, I tried again,
pushed past my initial problems,
hated being alone with my thoughts
when I was walking around the town
because most of my thoughts were about
how good Turn A Gundam was,
and basically did such a bad job
I was dying over and over on day two
and realized I'd have to go back
and gave up.
So I spent years agreeing with critics,
convinced of their arguments
that games could do more things
than be viscerally entertaining or mechanically fun,
despite failing to play the central game
many used in their example
of the value of negative experiences.
It was too negative for me, apparently.
Only now, with the HD edition
and the new translation,
did I finally stick with it long enough
to truly enter into the experience,
and I'm glad I finally got to do that,
and I think I really needed the better translation
to help bring me in.
That older version probably has its charms,
and I'm sure it must considering the game had defenders
for almost a decade before the fixed version came out,
but it was certainly too much for me.
However, even the new and improved version
of the game still has its problems.
We've already covered aspects of the game
that are just not gonna be for everyone.
The slow pace, the tone,
the feel of the gameplay and mechanics.
Now let's talk about the actual problems.
♪♪
Part four, the jank.
One thing that's absolutely necessary
to successfully progressing the story
is to read your mail.
You get letters from people over the course of the day,
and the only way to know you get them
is to know you get them,
and the only way to read them is to hit the L key
on your keyboard to open up the letters menu.
The game doesn't tell you this.
The game's tutorial, amazing in its own way as it is,
fails to tell you one of the most critical things
you need to know. If you don't read your mail,
you straight up will not know what to do on some days,
and as far as I can tell, nothing in the game tells you
unless you check your keyboard options.
This is a huge oversight.
The game does do interesting things
with not giving you proper information,
like it never tells you that food prices
are about to ruin your life, or it doesn't tell you
that some of your quests will end in disaster
and you maybe shouldn't have bothered
or run away with the money,
and if someone's not going to get to those moments
because they didn't understand
what they were supposed to be doing
or got annoyed they hadn't even been told
a core feature by the game,
it's a genuine flaw.
Speaking of the flaw...
Hear that thud?
When you have too many items in your inventory,
the item drops on the ground in a bag
and you have to drop something else to pick it up.
If this is a plot-important item,
not hearing that and looking down to swap something out
could cause a lot of problems.
Ha ha ha.
I think the game could have done a much better job
of letting you know when you don't have room for something.
This is a section from the changeling story later on.
I can't pick up this bag because my inventory is full,
but the game has no way of telling me,
so I'm just sitting here getting stabbed to death
and then I have to load a save and drop something
in order to pick this up.
This isn't as critical,
but it showcases the problem in a funny way.
If you sneak up on a rat
instead of letting them see you and chase you,
you can pick them up and actually use them
in rat races later on,
but if your inventory is full,
they just turn into a bag with a rat in it.
If you can't progress the story
because you dropped something
or you're too busy micromanaging what's in your inventory
in case you get given something important,
then you're being made to miss out
on what's good about the game
by a poorly implemented mechanic.
Pathologic is already not for everybody
and the mechanical stuff like this only detracts...
Oh, fuck!
The mechanical stuff like this
only detracts from what makes it truly unique.
There's a lot of jank in the game.
AI bugs out if you stand in the wrong place
during fights, spins in circles,
or stands still and waits to die.
You can get stuck in level geometry sometimes.
The physics like to explode.
The thing is, a lot of these sorts of problems
are a result of the game existing at all.
Like, you could spend a ton of man hours
making the AI work perfectly in fights
that aren't on completely flat ground,
or you can get the game out
before your team goes bust,
and in many ways, much like Eye Divine Cybermancy
or Vampire the Masquerade Bloodlines,
AI bugs are a good thing.
They're a reminder of how much bloody work it took
to whip this thing into existence
with the available tools.
I still shudder when I think about
how to get the source engine to do things
I or Vampire did, and Pathologic's engine
seems like it was made out of whole cloth.
Do you have any idea how hard that is?
Video games are hard to program.
It takes years of work to make something good.
Games, as a rule, even the stable-looking ones,
are usually at their core hugely hacked together
to barely do whatever they do,
and even what seems like simple, slight changes
run the risk of absolutely obliterating
everything you hold dear,
so a lot of the game's weakest aspects
feel like a compromise for the inability
or instability of the engine.
In the story, for example, sometimes characters interact.
They talk or get one another to do things,
but while you're present,
characters are never doing anything.
They're just standing where they're supposed to be standing
and you go over and talk to them and you get the impression
they're in the middle of doing it
or taking a break or something.
Sometimes characters meet up to discuss something
or get attacked by soldiers and escape,
but it's always just happened when you walk in
and everything's already over whenever you're there.
It's not super immersion-breaking,
but a little more interaction
or being able to watch the characters do the things
you're told they did might have been nice.
Also, characters sharing a space together
don't seem to regard each other.
They either do their idle animation
and occasionally say lines like they normally do
just next to each other...
Yes? What is there to talk about now?
Are you sick or something?
How's my brother? Any news on him?
...or they're completely frozen in place.
You never even get to watch a conversation
between two characters.
Even when they're in the same room,
you talk to each of them separately.
Again, these aren't things I would really
criticize the game for.
These are reflective of the absolutely minuscule amount
of budget and time the developers had
and the limitations of their engine.
These are things that it would have been nice
to see working better but aren't a huge problem
when you're actually playing.
There's other technical problems too.
There's this weird bug where the screen's
entire color palette shifts when certain effects are playing
like fires or blood splatters during combat.
I'm sure there's a fix for this,
but I decided to just live with it.
It felt in the spirit of things to do that,
but it's still very distracting
and definitely not intentional.
All in all, all the little things like this
contribute to the overall feeling
that the creators had lofty ideas
for their story and world full of characters
to interact with and environments to explore
but were limited in what they could accomplish.
However, it's important not to confuse limitation
with artistic choice because some things
in the game are easy to dismiss as problems
but work in the context of the story that's being told
and the overall effect being attempted.
On that note, we haven't really talked
about the graphics yet.
Visually, even for the time, the game
was regarded as pretty ugly.
Everything is a weird angular facsimile
of what it's supposed to be.
The color palette is drab.
Infected and dying districts tint things
even uglier shades, and all the minor NPCs
look the same as each other.
However, I think that ugliness was deliberate
and actually serves a purpose.
Oh, no, it's the pretentious police!
They found me!
Oh, Jesus Christ!
The game is set in a dying rural town.
The sky is never clear, everyone's sick,
everything is depressing, and the filters
that turn up in infected areas make everything
even more sickly.
The fairly low texture detail and polygon count
do end up contributing to this look
and feel in their own way.
By being not much to look at,
the downer tone set by the story and mechanics
isn't thrown away by looking pretty.
The game's art design when it comes to characters
or the more interesting locations is imaginative enough
that even if it doesn't look visually great,
you can see what they're going for
and understand what it's supposed to be at least.
So, at least in my opinion,
the art style contributes to the feel.
I think it works that it looks like this
and not other ways, but I'm not sure
if I'm happy with saying that because if the game
had looked better, like if it was on par with Half-Life 2,
I don't think I'd have been saying,
this should have looked worse, would I?
It's one of those things where because it works
well enough for what it is, I don't feel a need
to complain that the graphics are bad
even though obviously they could be better.
People can decide for themselves
where the experience is improved or worsened
by things like bugs or inventory stuff
or the combat or graphics or translation
and ultimately the game is what you get out of it,
and for some people the line of what makes a game good
is very far away from anything
any version of this game is doing.
It's completely understandable why some people
don't engage with the game or want to and bounce off it.
I certainly did that the first two times
so I can respect that.
Like I said, it's not fun.
I can't really recommend you play it.
That's why I'm here sharing what I think is interesting
about the experience and not telling you
to play it for yourself.
I suffered so you didn't have to.
["Bloodborne"]
Once you get over the initial humps
and learn to deal with the difficult elements,
cope with the survival mechanics and get good at walking,
wow, what a phrase, get good at walking.
Learn to do a repetitive, unsatisfying thing
on your way to a goal.
Walking in Pathologic reminds me a little bit
of doing exercise or cleaning my kitchen.
It's not fun, but it's important to learn how to do it
or the empty cans of kidney beans that still have some juice
and a bean or two in them you left on the side
to figure out which bin to throw them out in
start to smell after getting left there
for a week and a half.
That's not a real story.
Once you figure out what the game is demanding of you,
it doesn't stay as difficult as it seems.
I think people tend to overstate the game's unpleasantness
when it's not a constant.
It's just an early spike as it teaches you
what the experience is going to be like.
Once you get into the swing of things,
The Bachelor is a cake walk but without the cake.
I mean, you aren't exactly given no help.
Almost everyone important trusts The Bachelor,
and he starts out with some useful items,
a weapon, decent money, some medicine,
and he can make a whole lot more during the game
doing quests for the rich people who trust him.
It is possible to get on top of the game's economy
and survival mechanics as The Bachelor.
It gets hard at times and even harder
if you insist on doing the good guy things in quests
like not running away with all the money
or food you bought for that one quest
or giving away literally all the money you have
saving six random people from getting wrongly executed,
which I didn't do.
I loaded my save after this cutscene played
and kept the money, and I'm a bad person for it,
but even if you do all the good guy things,
if you know what you're doing and take the opportunities
that are given to you, you can make it through alive
even while being a good person.
The Bachelor's story is technically quite hard
but ultimately forgiving.
It's a pretty balanced experience all in all.
Anyway, the Haruspex's story begins with you
bleeding to death.
Upon arriving at his hometown via the train station
after ten years away studying surgery,
the Haruspex, Artemy Burakh,
has been stabbed repeatedly in a fight
with multiple people who believed him to be a murderer
trying to escape via the station.
Artemy's just got here and he's already bleeding out
while wanted for his own father's murder,
and this isn't just a cutscene that happens
before the game starts. Oh, no.
You begin the game at the train station
surrounded by corpses with your health low,
your reputation even lower,
and your hunger and exhaustion meters
already half full.
Now if you were wondering why the Haruspex
did what he did in his playthrough,
here's the first of many reasons why.
It turns out that for Artemy,
everything was fucked all the time.
Yeah, sure, the Bachelor playthrough was pretty hard.
You maybe even figured out how to play it
and not die too much.
I bet you thought you were good at this game.
That's where you're wrong.
Daniil Dankovsky's fun step vacation
was just the tutorial
for Artemy Burakh's tormentous nightmare.
♪♪
Some people refer to playing the Haruspex as hard mode,
and I must admit, at the beginning,
it is a little bit like getting stabbed in the dick,
but after that it gets much worse.
Remember that horrifying moral quandary
as Dankovsky where you could risk
six innocent people getting executed
if you choose not to get involved in something
that isn't your business anyway?
The Haruspex has a moral quandary
a million billion times harder,
and it's his first quest.
After getting chased into the warehouse territory
by an angry mob, you go inside
and meet a gang of children.
This gang was there in the Bachelor's playthrough,
but you only really visited them, like, once.
They weren't really very interested in talking to you,
and the Bachelor was too busy sucking up
to the important people to care about a bunch of children.
When you talk to Notkin, their leader,
he says they have a rebel who stole something
from them to defect to a rival gang.
He says if you do him the favor of killing them for him,
he'll give you a gun and some ammo.
Now, I don't want to tip your hand as to whether
a gun might be a useful item to have in this playthrough,
but as soon as I left the building,
a man tried to beat me to death.
Remember that reputation mechanic?
It turns out that when it's low enough,
in addition to shopkeepers not trading with you,
all regular NPCs will attack you in the street.
Oh, and because these people are just law-abiding citizens
attacking a wanted criminal,
killing them in self-defense is a crime,
and your reputation will drop even further.
Ah.
Mmm.
So either you run away to preserve
what reputation you have left
and try to do good things to correct it
or fight back and make everything worse.
Good luck, fucker!
Have those guys seen me?
Yep, they've seen me.
I feel very seen right now.
Since fighting is more of a fact
of the Haruspex's short life, yeah,
having a gun would really help with that.
So you go out into the steppe and...
Oh. Oh, fuck off.
Of course. This was a gang of children.
Of course the rebel member is a kid.
So you can tell him off and send him on his way
for a minuscule reputation boost,
and if you kill him, it drops a bunch
because, you know, you've killed a child,
but your reputation already can't get much worse,
and Notkin's offer of a gun is a pretty big deal,
and this kid has a schmowder on him.
It's one of the critical items.
It's basically the one thing in the game
you can't pass up an opportunity to get.
Plus he's in a gang, so he knew the risks.
So you can get a gun super early on in Artemy's playthrough
but at a significant moral cost.
Obviously the kid is just polygons,
but if you take the roleplaying seriously
or even just stop for a moment and ask yourself
if you would do this in real life if it meant survival,
there's a lot of feelings to unpack here.
I mean, let's recap.
In many modern RPGs, child murder is still a thing
that won't even go on the table.
Get on the fucking table, MacReady!
Oh, I'll be back for you in Fallout 4, fucker,
when you're old enough to die!
In Pathologic, one of the most taboo things
there is in gaming is one character's first quest
and there's significant personal justification
for going through with it.
You are dying and you need the stuff
you get for it desperately.
You just have to find a way to live with the fact
that you are now wanted for a murder you definitely
did commit along with the one murder you didn't.
Now it's not all bad for the Haruspex.
Okay, it is, but he gets one thing.
As a Menkhu, he can also dissect corpses,
a thing the Bachelor had to get you out of prison
to do for him.
Every corpse you come across carries a heart,
a liver, one kidney,
I don't know, just go with it,
and some blood.
These grisly items form a new kind of currency.
Various characters in the game will trade you
really useful stuff for these,
opening up an entirely new black market economy.
Characters who wouldn't even talk to the Bachelor
are now an extra tool for survival
if you know where to look.
Give me the herbs, worm.
Artemy's father's secret lab has tools to make medicines
that can raise immunity and lower infection super easily
making him infinitely more survivable
when it comes to the plague than Dankovsky
if you put effort into perfecting the recipes.
They work like the medicine you've used before
but much stronger and with much less downsides
if you get them right.
I really like the asymmetrical storytelling
that's happening with this aspect of the gameplay.
Not only is it just an extra layer of fun stuff
to learn and master to survive in the town
and it feels good getting it right,
but you're also seeing the sides of the world
that Dankovsky's beliefs just denied him access to.
He thought that this medicine was made up
and here it is keeping you alive
even if you get infected as Artemy
and actually it's really hard not to as him.
It's much less of a problem
because of all these herbal remedies you've got
but that's about it, so you're fucked,
but once the plague becomes a problem,
you can live long enough to be killed by something else
like this great bit where as soon as you leave a building
it spawns two muggers outside
and they both throw knives at you
which kills you instantly.
At the very least, if you have to defend yourself
and lower your rep, you get to keep whatever
was in their pockets and their meat pockets
and with the new economy,
maybe not being accepted by society
isn't as much of a death sentence.
I really do feel like Burak doesn't enjoy
unnecessary violence.
He's an educated man.
He seems quite noble in a way.
He wouldn't do it if he didn't have to.
It's unbecoming of his station.
Wait, does that guy have a shotgun?
Oh-ho-ho-ho-ho-ho-ho!
Getting a shotgun. One second.
Gimme, gimme, gimme, gimme, gimme, gimme, gimme, gimme.
Getting a shotgun on day one feels a little broken
after how late I got one as the Bachelor,
but what makes it extra engaging
is the knowledge that I'll probably need it.
Selling weapons as the Harrisbacks
is even more nail-biting than before.
Just because of the way his campaign is set up,
you will need everything you could buy with that money
even more desperately than before,
but you also kinda need the g-
Wha-come on! What the fuck?!
There's five guys?!
So it's about now that I realized why Artemy ended up
with his reputation as the Ripper.
He was in a desperate place,
so he was forced to make difficult decisions,
and the few options available to him
involve getting his hands dirty.
The story makes a lot of sense now.
He wasn't a serial killer.
He was a guy who was in the wrong place at the wrong time
and has to fight to survive
and solve his own father's murder
and maybe help the town,
and one of his skills happens to be surgical ability.
Luckily, there are some chances to redeem yourself.
You hear one of your attackers from the opening
got away and is bleeding out in the graveyard.
This guy needs a blood transfusion,
and if I save his life, maybe he'll help clear my name.
So you traipse all the way across the entire town
to get to the hunchback who will draw some of your blood
for you if you have enough health to spare.
Pick it up.
Don't forget to pick it up this time
or you'll have to come all the way back again!
And then take a long stroll all the way back.
Did I say stroll? I meant to say...
Seven guys are chasing me.
Oh, God, stop it! Leave me alone!
I'm a good person. It's just a misunderstanding.
Oh, thank God, a sewing needle.
Hey, kid, take it. Thanks for the medicine.
I'll be needing that. Anyway, back to being chased.
The walking in the easy mode, the bachelor's playthrough,
was pretty tense at the best of times,
but now it's an active fight for survival.
Leave me alone, please!
Just let me do a good thing!
Why don't you try walking a mile in my shoes?
You know what? Don't put your feet
anywhere near my shoes.
You can all put both of your feet
in the grave.
Look, don't criticize my one-liner, okay?
I'm under a lot of stress.
♪♪
♪♪
-♪♪
-♪♪
-♪♪
-♪♪
-♪♪
Ooh, a lemon.
-♪♪
-♪♪
-♪♪
And blood transfusion. I did it!
I saved a life!
-♪♪
-♪♪
Yay!
Now I'm well on my way to clearing my name,
and I'm only mostly poor and exhausted
and hungry and dead.
Fuck!
So remember the perspective thing I talked about?
The Haruspex, as a former local of this culture,
is trusted by the people who hate the bachelor
and spends a lot more time in places
the bachelor only got to go once
and then got the shit kicked out of him for going to.
Oh, yes, fucking get him, mate. Yeah!
So you see a completely different side of the story
and of the town since you spend time
being public enemy number one.
The reputation mechanics basically didn't come up
in the bachelor's run unless you killed people for no reason,
but now you have to face the problems
having a low one poses and build it back up to survive.
It's hyper-engaging, not just because it's hard
but because you remember how it was before.
It's the same conjuring trick as day two's food shortage.
Everything is different and scary all over again.
I love it. It's hard. It's punishing.
Arguably, it's incredibly unfair, but I love it.
You learn more about aspects of the plot
the town jester had no idea about.
For example, you are the reason the Stamatins
never turned up on day two
when cowardly little Dankowski tried to flee the town.
Maria found out about the plan
and got you to convince them to stay
by telling them you'd invented some cool new alcohol.
The Stamatins are really into the local drink,
an absinthe-like spirit with possibly magical properties,
and your medicines actually are derived
from the same ingredients which you can trade
with Andre for great stuff,
and then just to keep you on your toes,
once you get your reputation sorted,
a few days later it all happens again.
You get captured by Saburov's men and thrown in jail
just like you did in Daniel's story,
and here's where another aspect
of the multi-character structure becomes clear
by actively fucking you.
When you aren't in control of a character,
they make worse decisions than you did.
When you talk to him, he talks like the worst
of the options you could have chosen.
He's naturally more of a dick.
He even says random Latin phrases at you.
It's great.
I love this prickly little prick.
He's just so well-characterized,
and I love how much the game hammers home
what an idiot he is in this version of the story.
The big city guest jumps the gun too much.
Not the mystery-solving type, really.
But he doesn't know our traditions.
He's bound to be deceived.
Even the plays that you can go see
call Dankowski a piece of shit.
All in all, we can fight.
You self-serving jerk.
Dankowski believes the disease came from the wells.
He's wrong.
["Taps"]
But more importantly,
he never stages a prison break.
You have to break yourself out.
Then, later in the game,
he fucks up a quest you did easily
when you were playing as him,
and then you have to break him out of prison.
Nice going, Dankowski!
Okay, okay, fine.
Don't panic. I'll bargain for your release.
30 clips of rifle ammo?
Listen, there's a plague going on.
We're kind of on the clock here,
and I'm not giving bullets to a gang of violent kids.
Someone could get hurt.
["Taps"]
["Crying"]
["Taps"]
I did it. I saved the Bachelor.
["Taps"]
The Haruspex's main quests are to develop a panacea,
an actual cure for the plague,
to figure out who killed his father, obviously,
and to assume his father's duties in the Kin,
the people of the steppe.
To do this, he gets to go into the abattoir
and talk a lot with Foreman Oyun,
the guy who's currently in charge
and the Bachelor barely heard anything about
and who is also bad at his job
and everyone hates and wants you to replace him.
He starts giving you trials
to prove your worth.
Two of these trials are he gives you a poison
and you have to do something for him before you die of it.
I'm not gonna say the trials
are just tricks to try and kill you,
but I don't know. Hmm.
The final trial is to jump into a big hole and die.
Uh, I'm not really sure about this one, Chief.
He says it's a spiritual experience
and your father did this too to take his place in the Kin,
but no one else says anything about any trials.
By the way, uh, if you jump in the hole, you die.
There is a spiritual aspect
to Artemy's life in the town, though.
When you're walking around out in the steppe,
you can hear a cool distant chanting now.
["chanting"]
["chanting"]
A character later tells you the voice you're hearing
is your father's voice. That's really cool.
You feel more in touch with the land in his story
and you kind of are.
Artemy's medicines are made from plants that grow in the town
and he can actually pick them up
when he sees them around the place.
The wide open empty space you felt was kind of meaningless
as the Bachelor is suddenly rife with items
that can help you.
You start to literally see the town differently
as the Haruspex and that's just incredibly cool.
All the least fun bits of the first playthrough
are ramped up to 11.
The walking is even more excruciating and circular.
The survival mechanics are harder on account
of having no money and low reputation a lot of the time
and not having as many rich friends.
Many of the quests are deliberate in-story attempts
to waste your time and get you killed by Foreman Oyun,
but you're invested now.
The suffering is engaging
and you want to know what happens,
how it all shakes out for him.
You take the hours of walking in stride.
Ha ha.
You see all the efforts you go to as proof
that you're willing to go through hell and high water
to save this town.
If you didn't like this game,
you wouldn't get to this point anyway,
but if you somehow did, it's excruciating.
It's awful.
You're having a shit time being bored,
but if you care about the story,
if you've got immersed in the atmosphere
and are engaged fully with the survival mechanics
and your understanding of how much harder things are now,
this is the best fucking time I've had in a game in years.
It's still not fun.
It's something else.
This other thing I can't even describe.
It's satisfying in a way I'm not used to games being.
In a way, the game is asking you a serious question
about whether you're willing to be punished to succeed.
If you give up and close the game and stop playing it,
you're basically letting the town die
without your help, aren't you?
Oyun is trying to make you give up and stop playing,
and I'm not gonna let him.
I'm gonna solve this shit, and I'm gonna cure the town.
Just remember to pick up the quest items
that drop at your feet or you have to come
all the fucking way back again.
You also learn how badly you'd accidentally
messed a lot of things up as the Bachelor
without even knowing it.
Late in the game when you've learned a lot of the mystery
and figured out at last how to make a cure for the plague,
but only in extremely limited quantities
whose source ingredient is almost impossible to get,
there's one side quest where a giant bull
mysteriously appears stuck to a giant steak.
The giant bull's blood can be used as a source of the cure.
You get some from the bull and make arrangements
to get it pulled off the steak and rescued properly
the next day, which might even give you enough
to save the whole town.
Then you remember that when you were the Bachelor,
there was a side quest featuring a staked bull
surrounded by people which was a clear health hazard.
What if people congregating like that spreads the plague?
Or what if they're planning a riot?
So you nonchalantly ordered the bull to be burned
and thought nothing of it.
-♪♪♪
-♪♪♪
-♪♪♪
-♪♪♪
Dankowski, you prickly prick!
You've buried us all!
So make the most of the blood you got the day before
because that's all you're getting.
In any case, the Haruspex run is a spectacular playthrough.
It's excellently designed.
It forces you to relate to mechanics you felt like you knew
but in even more knuckle-tightening ways,
and every time you get one over on the world or Oyun
and survive to the next day having learned more,
it feels like a genuine victory.
Having an in-depth understanding of the layout
and purpose of each part of the town
and then getting to be a fugitive from the lore in it
is so cool.
You get to see your previous character
how other people saw him instead of how you probably felt
while playing as him.
You learn more about the mysteries of the town
from a second perspective,
and you finally have something of an idea
of how everything slots together.
All the problems the game has are even more glaring
after another 20 hours of playing a story in it,
but I had an even better time as the Haruspex overall,
and I'm glad I sat through the grim,
bloody nightmare of the story to the end.
The bitterest end.
Destruction is inevitable.
There's no miraculous way out.
There was nothing to hope for from the start.
I can't really talk about Pathologic
without showing you how it all shakes out.
It's too cool not to talk about.
By the final days, the town is a war zone.
An Inquisitor and later the army have shown up
to try to get things under control,
but the commander hates the Inquisitor
and they won't work with each other.
He loses control of a bunch of his troops.
Half of them die of the plague themselves,
and all they've really added to the proceedings
is now the army's shooting the diseased in the street,
so I really hope that you have medicine
because if you get too infected,
God, this last section is hard.
Actually, here's a weird thing.
If you get hit by the flamethrower,
it does a ton of damage,
but it also reduces your infection level.
I think it's meant to be a metaphor
for burning out your infection.
Usually this kills you, but due to a bug,
if you somehow survive the fire
because you got out of dodge super quick
and had a lot of health,
if it reduces your infection past zero,
it cures you of the disease.
Hey, thanks for that, you little fucker.
The disease itself is chasing you down
in an evolved, even faster form
that looks like angels made of blood.
It's a nightmare.
The army's brought a giant cannon
and has orders to shell the entire area to the ground
to prevent the plague from spreading if it comes to that,
and it is coming to that.
However, after a lot of false starts
and internal politicking
and generally getting messed around,
your characters manage to find a solution to the plague.
The trouble is each character finds their own solution.
The Bachelor has helped develop a vaccine
which can protect the healthy from getting infected
and falls in with the Kains,
the utopian academics and elites
who helped develop the Polyhedron,
the impossible structure next to their house
that has kept most of the town's children safe inside
and may now house Simon's soul.
It's a marvelous, miraculous thing
that heralds a new and beautiful future.
He also comes to think the town is a lost cause.
He's sick of the babblings of its people
whose customs have prevented him from helping them.
Over the course of the game,
the Bachelor's map of the town evolves
as he learns new things
and gets more and more disillusioned with his quest.
To the Bachelor, the town is an ugly and disgusting thing,
crammed on a hill where it shouldn't
with its blood and darkness seeping into the soil,
and eventually the beautiful, mathematical Polyhedron
joins it, a wonderful thing,
skewering through the dark earth
and its corrupted blood,
bigger and more important than anything else.
He believes at this point the plague is caused
by the backwater people's unsanitary practices
causing animal blood to congeal in the earth
for thousands of years.
The Bachelor wants the commander to shell the town,
destroying it and the plague
and freeing the Polyhedron of its corruption,
leaving the survivors to build a new town
on the other side of the river
governed by the visionary Kains.
If the Bachelor gets his way,
he really did bury them all.
♪ ♪
The Haruspex, however, is a local of the town
and has gotten more involved in the internal struggles,
assumed his rightful place as the leader of the Kin,
and finally gained access to the source of blood
he can use to make a panacea and cure the infected,
a step closer to defeating the disease
than the Bachelor's vaccine.
He manages this after a, let's say,
mildly tedious final boss fight with the Foreman.
Yeah, the Haruspex run has a final boss fight in it?
Punch him 30 times and he does a quarter
of your health each hit.
You finally get your revenge on the man who,
it turns out, killed your father.
His map screen evolves as he learns too,
portraying the town as built on the back
of a giant bull with the veins of the world
portraying the town as a gigantic organism.
Then the Polyhedron appears, tearing through the veins,
injuring the earth itself.
Blood pools at the base of the tower,
myopic dreams of utopia
scraping a nightmarish wound into the earth.
To the Haruspex, the Polyhedron caused the plague
and it should be destroyed so the town can heal.
♪ ♪
I like these two divergent climaxes.
Both characters have such different perspectives
and experiences that you can see how they came
to the conclusions they did, and it highlights
their differing philosophies about the world
and how to live in it.
Dankofsky wants to transcend the flesh
to defeat death itself,
to build wonderful and impossible things.
He doesn't really care about average people.
He feels like he's too important for them.
He doesn't even like them, really.
His ultimate medicine prevents infection,
shields you from the plague,
but doesn't actually stop it killing the people it gets to.
An ounce of prevention might be worth a pound of cure,
but what about all the people who need curing?
They get written off, not just by his version of medicine,
but the town itself has to die for him to be certain
the plague is dead with it.
He'd rather destroy something
than risk it spreading the disease,
a mistake that actually helped doom
the creation of more actual cures.
Every choice he made was understandable,
and yet it was never enough to actually save
most of the people of the town.
Artemy is a polar opposite.
He's more concerned with curing the sick
than protecting the healthy.
He gets down in the dirt, the bowels of the earth,
and makes tough sacrifices,
even killing innocent people,
but he does it compassionately
to try to end the suffering for real,
and protecting the townspeople means protecting them
from the high-minded idealism that led to the negligence
that failed to prevent the plague early on
and invented the structure
that caused it all in the first place.
A lot of this stuff is very ambiguous.
There's a lot of ways of looking at it,
but at least in my interpretation,
the game seems very concerned with the tensions
between the utopian dream of a better world
and the actual people who have to build it
and live through the follies that come with these projects.
It's hard not to notice this Russian game's parallels
with the history of the Soviet Union.
As for the changeling, ah, I can't be bothered.
I mean, come on, do I really need to do
a third 20-hour playthrough and then explain all of that?
I'm sure nothing that interesting happens in it.
These endings don't just happen on their own, however.
Left to its own devices, at the end of the 12th day,
the army destroys everything and the bad ending happens.
In order for your character to successfully get their ending,
none of their bound can be sick.
They have to prove that they're a good doctor,
which means doing the main quest on time every day,
and if you didn't, you have to cure the ones that got sick.
You can do this by using the panaceas or schmowders
you found over the course of the run,
so if you didn't use them yourself
or sell them for tons of cash,
they're a kind of get-out-of-bad-ending-free card
per person who got ill.
If you prove you've done your duty as a doctor,
you're let into the cathedral to argue your case,
and when the day ends, you get your character's ending.
Yay! The end.
♪♪
But on the same day, you also get letters
from the other two characters.
They both still have their own ideas
for what needs to be done about the plague,
but because you weren't in control of them,
they kept messing up.
Their plot lines weren't quite as successful
as they could have been,
and a bunch of their bound caught the plague.
They plead with you to help cure them
so they can argue their case too,
and if you cure all of them,
you can invite them to the cathedral
and actually pick their ending instead of yours.
You can tell the commander to go with someone else's idea
if you get them a seat at the table.
Then you get their ending instead,
and in the classic HD edition,
you get an achievement for it.
That's nice. You get that ending instead.
Cool.
♪♪
But if you do manage to invite someone else,
something else happens too.
You get a letter from the powers that be
inviting you to the Polyhedron.
You only go there, like, twice as the Bachelor
and once as the Haruspex, and you never go very far in.
Only those with young, unsullied, creative minds
can see it for more than a series of small rooms.
This time, you can descend to the very bottom
to meet the gods of the world.
Major spoilers from here on out, folks.
This is the secret shit half the people
who finished the game never even learn.
Here we go.
♪♪
That model looks a whole lot like the town
with the Polyhedron sticking out, doesn't it?
Oh, fuck! It is the town!
You're in a garden, and two giant children are there
surprised that their doll has come to life.
The town, everyone in it,
and the plague are just an imaginary story
told by two kids in a sandbox.
They tell you you're a toy,
and you can complain about your fate
and how unfair being not real is at them,
but it's all futile.
You can't change anything.
They're kids playing God,
and you were their imaginary friend,
a doll who briefly got to question his masters
before returning to the game.
So, uh, this ending is pretty divisive,
to say the least.
It really annoyed some people.
There's plenty of posts out there
about how much it messes with them.
This happens 20 to 30 hours in
to a story you've been super engrossed in,
and if you do really good at the story,
the secret extra revelation is that none of it was real.
It was all in vain.
In fact, as Dankovsky,
your mission statement finally changes here
to tell you it was all in vain.
After a whole game of staring at Dankovsky's quest
to defeat death,
it finally changes to acknowledge
all his quests were always pointless.
He was never even real.
I mean, this is equivalent to a movie
all turning out to be a dream.
It's a bit of a kick in the teeth, honestly.
In a way, it's the ultimate depressing move
to have worked this hard and suffered so much
and then to be told you were just a toy.
It's so much, so mean,
and yet it's exactly what Pathologic
has been doing the whole time.
Even right at the end,
they still managed to hurt you
one last time.
♪ ♪
But guess what?
There's an even more secret ending.
There's an even twistier fucking twist.
If you saved both other characters bound,
which as either character is hard as hell
since it requires all the panaceas you can possibly get
in their quests and the couple schmowders you can get,
which, let me remind you, requires child murder
plus maybe a few extras from trading with this kid
who barely turns up and rarely has a schmowder
to trade for anyway.
She wants, like, seven flowers for it too.
I got one from her in 20 hours playing the Bachelor,
and no, this isn't even the clip of me finding it.
I can't remember where it is
because there's, like, 23 hours of footage.
Once you're done with the dogshit revelation
offered by the powers that be,
you get a second letter
from the people who executed the whole thing
inviting you to the theater.
The theater, the place you started.
It always meant something,
and now it's going to show you what.
Remember the first time you got to the end
of the impossible quiz and it turned out
you had to have kept all the skips?
That's how getting here and realizing
I needed to have never used any of these things was.
I'm glad I didn't, but wow,
they give you cures to the status effect
that threatens you the most in the whole game,
and the only way to truly win is to never use any
and save them up for the end,
and they don't even tell you you were supposed to do this.
It's genius because it's so fucking mean.
I mean, it's just...
Ah.
Pathologic, man.
This close to the end
with the town ghostly and empty
awaiting the time of my final decision,
getting a last minute secret invitation
from the figures behind everything,
even more behind everything than the gods
who made the world,
is so mysterious and satisfying and amazing.
I can't tell you how cool that last trip
from the Polyhedron to the theater was.
In a town with no more dangers,
no more threats, just me and the empty world,
the walk to the theater
is the most amazing journey of all.
Are these the same guys from the tutorial?
The ones no one but me could even see?
Oh, my God.
These aren't the people behind the events.
Well, they are, but they're more than that.
These are the developers of the game.
Holy shit!
The final secret is a chat with the developers.
The first thing they do is point out
the children aren't real either,
and I mean they're right too.
None of this is real.
Why would you be annoyed by the
it's all a game played by children twist ending?
It is all a game.
You always knew that.
You're literally playing a game.
The whole point is that games feel real
even though they aren't.
That's what suspension of disbelief is.
You never really believe a game is real,
but you briefly pretend you don't not believe
to engage with it,
and the game gave you a shitty twist
just to make you wonder why that twist hurts
when it's just telling you something you already knew.
God, what a cool double twist.
I love this so much.
You even get to pick whether to talk
as the character or as yourself.
God, this is cool.
In reality, all games are a conversation
between you and the developers.
All Pathologic does is rip down the curtain at the end
and show you that's what it was
and tell you that's okay.
It's fun to spend time in a world
someone else made for you.
It never had to be real to be real.
Oh, God, forgive me if my speech is unclear or absurd.
I'm still reeling from this.
Even writing the script after playing the game
and even saying it now,
I'm just, ah, I love this.
I can't even communicate it,
and that's what I've been trying to do
It's so good.
Anyway, time to go pick my ending.
You can say a final goodbye
to a bunch of the main characters on the last day
and talk about what might happen next.
Each of your bound has a thing to say to you.
As the Haruspex, if you got to meet the creators,
you can taunt the Inquisitor as the player
with the knowledge that she's all pretend,
and as the Bachelor, hey, changeling,
you've been weird and talking about
how transcendent and special you are this whole time,
but did you know this is all just a game
played by children?
Wait, what?
She knows?
She knows?
How long has she known?
What the fuck was happening in the changeling story?
So, it's all about trickery to you?
No.
No.
I detest trickery,
but if we ourselves are to suffer deception,
our hands are no longer tied.
Clara begins by waking up in a shallow grave.
The executors tell you you're going to be mistaken
for a murderer and a thief, but also a miracle worker,
and your reputation is always going to drop.
Clara is immediately adopted by Katerina Saburov,
the semi-magical lady and wife of the governor.
She sees her appearance as a sign of divine providence
who will do great things for the town
and believes you have magical healing powers.
You also hear that someone with your description
is thought of as a thief in the town,
and someone matching your appearance
was said to have killed Simon or Isidore.
Clara replies, yes, she is a good person,
and the bad things she'd heard
must have been her identical twin sister.
Huh. Is that an in-character fact about us?
Or did our character just tell a lie?
Well, it's both.
How is that possible?
Fuck you!
The Saburovs task Clara
with proving she has healing powers.
You hear there's been some violence out in the steppe.
Some guys tried to stop a murderer escaping the town
and got fucked up.
That sounds weirdly familiar.
And while you're there, you probably get into a fight
with the looters, and here's where you find out
that Clara's combat is hilariously terrible.
I mean that literally.
I was cackling when I discovered how shit this is.
Clara doesn't have a fist-fighting animation.
Instead, she kind of waves her hands around
all magic-like.
It's a very slow attack, and it does even less damage
than the previous character's attacks.
Oh, and she has tiny hands,
so she can't use any weapons or guns
except for one shitty gun that sucks.
So good luck in fights, says Clara.
45 hours and two earth-shattering revelations in,
and the game's still finding ways to destroy me.
This is the devs saying,
okay, we know you've probably figured out
how to fight in this game now,
so what if it was even harder?
From any kind of typical design standpoint,
this combat is horrendous, but it works
because at this point, you know the developers
are just messing with you for fun.
It's like when a close friend is rude to you
but in a cute way you both think is funny.
That's the kind of friendship you have
with the developers now.
I mean, to even get here,
you might have even met them already.
You then find the injured man you're supposed to save,
and you find out it's not a man.
It's, hey, remember this guy?
In this version of the story,
the Haruspex tried to kill the kid,
and the kid was injured but got away
because, you know, he's not as good at stuff
when you're not in control, that sort of thing.
From the kid's perspective and Clara's,
he's a monster who tried to kill a kid,
but from being the Haruspex, you know what was on the line.
It's cool storytelling.
You see Artemy's side, but you also have to recognize
that he's far from an innocent man here.
Luckily, he doesn't have as much blood
on his hands this time, it seems,
especially since we're going to help the boy.
Anyway, you lay on your hands to heal the kid
and complete the quest for, oh, he's dead.
So Clara's powers, if she has them at all,
don't seem to quite work how you expect,
at least not for healing traditional wounds.
The man who was supposed to serve as a witness
to your healing hands, far from assuming you're a charlatan
or a demon or a murderer,
actually still believes you're a hero though.
He decides the kid had been judged by your power
as a sinner and then killed instead of healed.
He thinks your power is the divine working through you
in mysterious ways.
Consider yourself purified.
You still have to prove you can heal people,
but he's basically sold on you as a divine being.
I'm not sure how to feel about this version of the story.
In a really good way, Haruspex made a very tough choice
and had to live with it, but I think it might actually
be even more bleak to have a story
where a character tries to heal the child of their wounds,
accidentally kills them, and is heralded
as a miraculous hero anyway.
I love this stuff. It's horrible.
It makes my skin crawl.
With the harder fighting and the constantly
lowering reputation you have to actively keep up
by doing good things, the game is pathologic
at its most pathologicist.
You have to do good things all the time.
Give money away, give up on your medicine,
kill baddies with your awful attacks, and so on.
Bachelor has a hard spike on day two,
and Haruspex has two hard spikes at the beginning
and partway through when he gets captured,
but Clara is constantly swimming
against a current of negative press.
Someone who looks exactly like her
has done a lot of bad things.
You have a new set of Bound, of course,
all the remaining main characters
who weren't in the first two's care.
As always, your job is to protect them
from getting infected or dying.
Wait, the Foreman of the Abattoir?
Oh, that's not gonna end well.
Clara's story has a lot of little extra things in it
to learn about character relationships and choices.
Lots of them are too small to go into depth about,
but at times it was like a victory lap,
the writers creating an extra post-playthrough story
for a character with a magical ability
that justifies them learning all kinds of new things.
It's another way of exploring the richness of the story.
You're still interacting with and causing the story
to play out the way it does,
but you have the strongest idea
of why it all worked out now
with two stories worth of hindsight.
When you talk to the Foreman
who gave the Haruspex so much trouble
and help him verify Artemy is a legitimate heir
to his position, this conversation causes him
to devise the trials he tormented you with
when you were playing the other story.
He comes up with them on purpose to get rid of Artemy.
Thanks, Clara, which is how it felt like as the Haruspex,
but getting that confirmation is really something.
On top of that, the thing where the other player characters
are worse at their jobs is cranked all the way up.
After the first few days,
the Bachelor and Haruspex's relationship
breaks down so bad,
they're actively trying to hunt each other down
for much of the story.
You get letters from their allies asking you
to find them and warn them the other is coming for them,
and you can even rat their locations out to each other
for money and medicine.
It's fun seeing how the worst possible
of their timelines plays out
when you aren't stopping either of them
from being jerks.
That said, it's clear that Clara
is the most rushed of the stories.
You can tell mainly because a lot of the side quests
are the same side quest each day.
For the second half of the game,
you have three side quests every day,
and they're always the same.
Two of them are to warn the Bachelor and Haruspex
about each other, and the third, well,
Clara starts getting letters
or possibly dream messages,
but it's in the letters menu, from her twin sister,
the evil Clara who is hiding out
somewhere new in the town each day.
If you don't find her based on cryptic messages
and get her to leave, which takes a lot of sleuthing
and running around infected houses,
the district she was hiding in
will be permanently infected for the rest of the game.
It's creepy talking to your own character too.
Whenever you find her in a house,
she's always facing away from you,
and it's super weird.
Dodging the plague in houses
to find a weird copy of yourself is great stuff.
You then also have to scare away her followers
who are hiding out in very hidden places
you won't think to look, and if you don't,
that area gets infected too.
So after the halfway point,
every day these are your three side quests.
They're always the same with the slight variation
being the house that the Bachelor and Haruspex
reach hiding in is a different place each day.
You only get given vague ideas of where they are
and you have to look around yourself,
and Clara's letters are actually quite cool puzzles,
I guess, to figure out where exactly she is in the town
based on your intuition and knowledge of the town
from two full playthroughs.
It's quite interesting, but having all three side quests
be the same one each day
with no real advancement of the plot really gets to me.
The other characters had serious cool subplot stuff,
but Clara just gets busy work.
I started to skip these quests after a few days.
There's also very little communication
that you can heal infected people as Clara.
Oh, did I mention that?
I didn't mention it earlier on purpose
because the game sure didn't.
When you use your hands on the infected,
it plays a different animation
and you get reputation back and they do a little bow.
It costs some health too, I guess.
So it's another thing you can do to keep your reputation up
and it's also a cool trade-off
because you lose health for doing it as well
and there's a risk of getting infected
while you're in those districts doing this,
but I don't remember being tutorialized
or told by the game you can do this.
I only know about this from other videos mentioning it.
I know Pathologic is a game that prides itself
on not conveying stuff and letting you figure things out,
but from a design perspective, this feels like a misstep.
I feel like if they'd had more time or resources,
they'd have made this much clearer.
I mean, they seem to give the implication
Clara's attack is an attack.
You use it to kill people
and it kills the first person you try to heal
and the first person you actually heal
happens in a cut scene.
They do the opposite of letting you know you can do this
and this only works on these characters too,
not the people who appear to be in the early stages
of infection. They just drop dead.
Like I said earlier, for the HD edition,
all the character audio was re-recorded,
but in Clara's scenario, specifically for Katarina
on around day three, for some reason,
one of the old voice actor's lines is still in there.
Nothing threatens your daughter.
Everyone will die but you will remain.
I feel like this sort of oversight probably happened
because development of Clara was rushed
even for the HD version
and an old line slipped through and didn't get caught,
which makes sense. A very small amount of players
ever get to the point this could happen,
and I'm glad they spent the time elsewhere
instead of triple checking all the voice lines
for every character for every character's story,
but it's at least a good indicator
of how generally rushed
some of the changeling's stuff is.
It's a minor thing but it points to the major thing
or at the very least I noticed it and I want to pretend
that I can make a point out of it.
Overall, if you were interested in Pathologic's story,
Clara's route is really satisfying.
If you're not, it's just more text
and combat even more frustrating than before
and yet more walking, but it's much more rewarding
in forthcoming with information than the others.
You put the work in.
You played 20 to 40 hours of story.
Now lots of the missing pieces you were curious about
can get filled in.
The story isn't pulling its punches either.
They know you've already played the game once.
I love a lot of sequels to movies and games
where they don't need to reestablish
or explain the simpler stuff.
They can just go nuts with established material
and ideas and this really hits that spot.
It gets kind of meta toward the end too,
so it's all about trickery to you?
Wherever have you come from?
No, I detest trickery.
If we ourselves are to suffer deception,
our hands are no longer tied.
It's like Clara kind of knows what's happening
without having to be told.
Some of her text options imply information
she never even learns herself,
but you know it from the other stories.
This is some Malkavian shit right here.
God, I should really make that vampire video
I teased years ago.
It's on the pile somewhere.
Hey, you, what are you doing out of your cage?
I'll get to you!
It even starts to become clear what the story
might really have been about all along.
Like, what does the Polyhedron actually do?
People say it can store dreams
so people can revisit them and share them
or trap a soul and keep a dead person alive,
but what does that mean?
Are souls literal things
or an ephemeral conceptual thing?
The idea of someone,
the presence they can manifest
through the effects of actions
from while they were alive?
Is a piece of my soul in this video?
Perhaps even surviving after my death?
I put a lot of myself in my work.
Am I immortal now?
In a sense, maybe I am.
I'm going to say the word now.
Now.
When did I say that?
Looking at the clock, it's 416 a.m.
on the 9th of November, 2019,
but when did I really say it?
I, now, will be 27
and talking about pathologic forever,
even if you come back in another 27 years.
Maybe I'm immortal and freed from earthly flesh
by existing in the form of a video.
Maybe the opposite is true.
Maybe I'm trapped here forever
and maybe this is worse than being dead.
Ahem.
Forgive me if my speech is unclear or absurd.
You have a lot more in-depth conversations
along these philosophical and spiritual lines,
and to me now, the Polyhedron feels like a metaphor
for video games themselves.
The rest of the town represents
the down-to-earth, day-to-day, boring reality
of walking to places, talking to people,
getting lied to, being a regular person,
eating food, getting sick sometimes,
and eventually dying, but in video games,
in art, death isn't real.
You can be whoever you like.
Games are stories, but more than that,
a way for people to share their stories
with others forever, to take part in them
and live on past the boundaries
of their simple material existence.
Everyone who made Pathologic will be dead one day,
but they'll still be here in this world they made,
staring out at you in eternal polygons,
talking to you, sharing their ideas and feelings,
a hand reaching from the grave to grasp you once more.
Art is the road to awe, to permanent expression,
and games are a collaborative expression too.
You're playing it, interacting, being in it.
This game is made for you.
Aren't you a part of it?
This game is a reminder of the immense
spiritual value of games,
to be somewhere else and move and act in it,
to be a piece of someone else's vision for a moment.
The Polyhedron represents the uplifting,
unrealistic, and yet truly real power
imbued upon us by our ability to have dreams,
literally and figuratively.
That's just how it reads to me, though.
It certainly feels that way at times.
Speaking of the Polyhedron,
when you visit there as Clara partway through,
you get to descend to the bottom
and meet the gods of the world
several days earlier than the other characters.
They're genuinely shocked to see you this time.
It's like Clara herself has more power
than the creators thought she would,
and here explains why Clara is the way she is,
why there's such confusion about her nature,
why there's two of her.
The powers that be are in disagreement
over who she is and what she's doing.
One of them thinks she's a thief,
and the other thinks that she is some kind
of divine being in their story.
I think this is actually really clever.
The powers that be are having competing interpretations
of this character they've made.
Clara's quest eventually leads to the discovery
of how her healing hands work.
They transform people's blood,
give them something that can protect them from the disease,
and if she uses it on stronger people,
for example, her bound, if they're sacrificed
and their blood is taken,
it can be used to make many cures for the plague,
so she can get seven of her bound
to agree to atone for their sins
by being sacrificed to save the town.
When you describe this to Foreman Oyun,
he sees it as a chance to undo the damage he's caused
and agrees wholeheartedly.
He tells you to tell the Haruspex
to not bother with the final trial,
the one where he jumps into a hole and dies,
since he no longer needs to kill him
to protect his position in the kin.
You can straight up ask him what happens
if he'd gone in the hole,
and he tells you he would have died
because, yeah, it's a big hole.
I left this out when I was talking about
the Haruspex for dramatic effect,
but I don't want to not mention it.
As the Haruspex, you do get Clara cryptically offering
to assist you, and if you agree,
when you go in the hole, you instead get this cool scene
where you can see your own corpse surrounded by executors
and you can choose someone from Clara's bound
to die in your place.
Artemy survives by doing this and then fights the Foreman,
so it really was a spiritual experience,
if you let the Changeling into your life at least.
I guess this is because Clara in the Haruspex's story
doesn't get her shit together enough
to realize she can use Oyun to solve
the plague problem directly herself.
Anyway, it's very funny to me that in Clara's run,
the Haruspex is genuinely prepping
to jump into a hole and die.
So Oyun and six others agree to make this sacrifice,
and that's her ending.
The town and tower get preserved,
but at the expense of people sometimes giving up
their lives to maintain it.
I like this ending. It feels like the reminder
that for society to survive intact
requires work and sacrifice to protect itself
from its own internal tensions and contradictions.
That sort of thing.
Clara's map evolutions are suitably miraculous.
Instead of either the town or the tower being monstrous,
the tower is a part of the town harboring some new thing,
a dream, a life, the future,
and the town is feeding it.
It's a symbiotic relationship which takes sacrifice
but which might be worth preserving,
and the sky is dreamlike reflecting either Clara's
more miraculous, fantastical perspective
or her knowledge that the world really is a dream of sorts.
Clara's first extra ending is nothing special.
You've already met them once in this playthrough,
so there's no real revelation here.
Hey, guys, it's me again.
Third time round now. How's it going?
Whoa, fuck.
Okay, that's cool.
The game keeps being meta about all the things
I think it won't address.
Like, just when meeting the developers
was starting to become a repetitive idea,
here it is getting one-upped by the third go-round
making fun of how that's starting to feel,
and here in the game, Clara kind of validates
my thoughts about the town and the polyhedron,
talking about these characters as if they're fragments
of real people, and in a way,
I really do feel like I know these people now.
I've spent a lot of time with them in their world
experiencing their creation.
You can even ask them more directly
what the other characters' stories
were supposed to be about.
It's a fantastic send-off getting to discuss the story
with its creators.
Holy shit, that's so fucking cool.
I talked about this earlier. It is on purpose.
Oh, man, this is great. I love this.
I utterly love this. This is the best thing ever,
and it's so tiny, so small.
It's the devs showing you all the little tricks
they used to make you frustrated and trapped
right there being complained about by you.
Ah, God, it's excellent.
You can ask what their plan was with the changeling,
and they make a joke about how rushed
and slapped together it was.
That's fun. I like that they're acknowledging things
the player would definitely have noticed about this by now.
It feels personal and real.
They're not resting on their laurels
and being pretentious about themes or ideas.
They're apologizing for things they knew they got wrong
and even making a joke at the expense
of this own indulgent last part.
What a great ending. God, I've loved the story of this.
I wish I could have gone into more detail about it,
but just talking about the things that jumped out to me
the most has taken this long.
It's been genuinely super awesome.
Even though it's all fake, it's all just a kid's game,
and on top of that, it's all just a video game,
I feel a sense of achievement for having stuck with it
in a strange way. Also, I quite like how hard
you have to work to achieve the actual good ending.
Like, the Bachelor's ending is just, like, fucked.
He's such a shithead, and the Haruspex's ending
does kind of destroy a really awesome, cool invention.
It's only by actually playing through the whole game
at least twice that you get the chance
to really get a decent ending for people.
Breathe it in.
Actually, no, don't breathe it in.
You didn't have to play the whole game.
You just listened to me talk about it
for a couple hours. Fuck you.
There are fine things, old boy,
which are more brilliant when unfinished
than when finished too much.
So Pathologic does a lot of very clever things
to make you feel a way games rarely even try
to make people feel,
and I think it achieves its goals fairly well.
It's an experience I have a hard time recommending
and which I know to be flawed,
but which I'm extremely glad I played in full.
Pathologic is the antidote
to the entire modern game design ethos.
It isn't a skinner box that rewards you
with simpler satisfactions like beautiful splatter graphics
when you get a headshot or a quest
that makes you feel heroic and powerful.
It makes you stare at the abyss of human cruelty
and ignorance and dares you to blink,
to close the game and give up.
I can't think of many other games that manage that.
I super love this game and its world.
Even though I don't think I'll ever want to touch it again
I'm glad I did it all,
and I feel like I've learned a lot
about the potential of games
and the many unique ways games can have
all kinds of effects on you.
All that said, and I've said it so much in this video,
I'm not making this to recommend a 15-year-old game.
I'm making it because I couldn't recommend
this 15-year-old game.
I could barely even recommend it to myself.
It took years to get around to playing it
past the first couple hours.
I had a really interesting time,
but 65 hours is a long time to spend
to eventually have an interesting time,
and I couldn't in good conscience
inflict that on someone else by telling them to try it.
Especially not now.
["Hidamare"]
["Hidamare"]
["Hidamare"]
So, yeah, love Pathologic.
Amazing game.
One of the best games ever.
Artistic masterpiece, but don't play it.
It sucks.
Luckily, there exists a game that does everything
Pathologic 1 does wrong right.
A game I can recommend so, so much more.
That game is Pathologic 2.
You don't have to play one to understand two,
especially not now that I've told you everything
you need to know about it.
When I sat down to play Pathologic 2,
I cynically assumed it would be a compromised version of one,
graphically and technically improved
but lacking the sorts of bold design elements
that contributed to making the original so unique.
Like, making a game like Pathologic more accessible
and understanding for a newer audience,
making it more engaging to play even,
would surely mitigate what it did best.
I've never assumed so wrong.
It's even more horrifying, even harder,
and a massive step forward in every possible way.
Except the music.
The music in 1 is better in my opinion,
but the music is still incredible stuff.
Like, top 10 best music in games, no question.
The creators made good on maintaining
the atmosphere and feel while removing the bugs
and elements that were truly bad
and took away from the experience.
They even threw in meta stuff
for people who played the first
or even people who knew the twists from the first.
I learned painstakingly the hard way
and you just learned easily over one video.
Perhaps, finally, after all these long years,
the deep game is here.
Well, almost here because Pathologic 2 isn't done yet.
It's not in early access per se
but not only is it still getting
what I'd say are critical bug fixes,
for example, an update while I was making this video
solved the performance problems
I would have talked about right now,
so nice one there,
but only one of the game's original stories
is in this version, at least right now.
The Haruspex.
It's still a full game because Pathologic
was three full games already basically,
but they're going to add more if they can afford to.
I'd buy the others as DLC or expansions, frankly.
There was a demo, the Marble Nest,
a few years ago where you play as the Bachelor for a day
and they just patched that into the main game
as an improved version of itself
and that's awesome too,
and yes, the Bachelor is even more of a shit.
I love him.
Truth does not do as much good in the world
as its counterfeits do evil.
God, what a great character.
I love him so much.
He's just, he's so well written
as an insufferable fucker.
Oh, man, he's great.
I swear to God I'm gonna cosplay as him
first chance I get.
Pathologic 2 isn't exactly a block puh...
there.
Sorry, I've spent hours and hours
recording this voiceover.
The game isn't exactly a blockbuster,
smash hit.
It's a niche sequel
to a barely known cult classic from Russia
a decade ago,
loved mostly by native Russian speakers
and Western pretentious nerd critics.
That's not a jab at pretentious nerd critics.
I'm one of those.
Did you hear that fucking bit
about this video having a soul?
Come on, let's not pretend I'm any better,
but even if we love it,
we're not exactly a huge demographic.
I don't tend to do calls to action in my videos.
I like to let people make up their own minds
about what to do with their lives
or whether a game is for them.
If you play Pathologic 1
after I deliberately didn't recommend it,
congratulations.
You passed the true test
by deciding to play the game for yourself,
and I love you for that.
Good luck with the fight with Bali,
and on day one, you can find extra food
left out on Nina's grave.
Pretend I left that for you.
Mwah. Keep the fact
I didn't recommend the first game
despite loving it in mind
when I say you should buy Pathologic 2.
It still might not be for you,
but you absolutely must try it to find out,
and in a world where mainstream games
are starting to feel like they're converging
upon the same Pavlovian uniform design
with only minor branding variations,
supporting independent work and true experiments
with the form, even if they don't turn out
to be something you personally like,
seems like THE step forward for video games.
The only other obvious step forward I can think of
is starting a game developers union.
Pathologic 1 is the best game you didn't play.
It's the best game I almost didn't play,
but Pathologic 2 is better,
and you are going to play it.
Go experience one of the most unique,
satisfyingly hurtful experiences there is in gaming.
I'd analyze it in detail,
but that would require spoiling it,
and you are going to play this,
so I wouldn't do that to you.
Not for a while, at least.
I need time to collect data
about other people's experiences
and think about how it achieves the effects it does,
and I want to play it all the way through three more times.
Okay, everybody break.
Go play Pathologic 2 and meet back here
in, I don't know, six months to compare notes
for my analysis of the sequel.
Oh, and whatever you do,
don't take the traveler's deal!
You weren't supposed to take the deal, Brendan!
♪♪
Hey, thanks for watching all the way, friend.
My videos are supported by my backers over on Patreon,
and I love them for it.
I used to do a thing where I read everyone out
who backed a certain amount during the credits,
but I have the best problem ever
of there being too many people to do that,
so I'm reading them out one last time
before I change things over.
In the future, people who back me $10 or more per video
can vote on what my next video is.
I'll have polls for what I feel like working on
or based on ideas and suggestions you folks give me.
I always want to do, like, four different things at once,
so this will hopefully give me some more perspective.
I'm amazed that I've somehow been
as well-supported as I have,
and I'm eternally thankful for being able
to do ridiculous things like get covered in soy,
build and destroy a set,
or spend almost a month playing and reading
and writing about an old Russian video game masterpiece.
With your continued support, I hope to do
even more ridiculous things.
So for the last time,
at least for the foreseeable future,
if I ever finish any of the video games
I'm trying to make, I'll hide a reading
of all my patrons' names in there.
In addition to all the names
scrolling past the screen right now,
I'd especially like to thank
Gay Rosencrantz,
Eight Goblins in a Trench Coat,
AtCoinCellPro,
A Bowl of Creamy Tomato Soup,
A Cat with Shades and a New California Republic
First Recon Beret,
A Deathly Styled 4K Merkin HD Underscore 1080p,
A Fish Named Nabby,
A Psychologically Damaged Dragon,
A. Blinken, Aaron D. Carter,
Abby Ballinger, Acelyn,
Ada Hall, Adam Appel, Adam Benzen,
Adam Melby, Adam Tenku,
Adam Warsong, A.D. Thornton-Smith,
Adult Sword Owner, Aidan Crute,
Al Swigert, Alan Orozco,
Alicia Lemons, Alex Lemkovich,
Alex Madsen, Alex Parkinson,
Alex Walston-Rudolph, Alexis Shambrook,
Alicia Parker-Martell, Allison Jay,
Alan Smith, Alice Orris,
Allison Sugar, All Thief, Amanda Beverly,
Alistair Thankyouforplayinglifeisstrange,
Amber Dorsey, Anakin Frywalker,
Andrea Chen, Andrew Brannan,
Andrew Gilley, Andrew Harding,
Andrew Jackson, Andrew Scheimer,
Andrew Wanker, Andy Karras,
Anthony Ha, Anthony Paoni,
Antonin E. Dumenc,
Aoife O'Brien, April Marches On,
Arsehole Tep, The Insufferable,
Artefind Felcantamo, Ash,
Asher Holy, Astrid Harper,
August, Orin Shaw, Auspun,
Avery P. Lookmum. He said my name.
I'm famous now. Please love me.
Avi Finkel, Az, Bad Kamish,
Banjo Hits, Bardic College of Controversy,
Basugasu Bakuhatsu Bakumatsu,
Beatrix Williams, Bebo Sloth,
Beekeeper Gal, Ben Slater,
Bendic Crogson, Benjamin Davidson,
Benjamin Roide Delnavoz, Bissot and Jenny,
Billy Reed, Bleed Red, Bob from Accounting,
Bongwater T, Bo Scar,
Bjorn Lammers, Brandon Broughton,
Brendan Dunsmuir Goss, Brendan Young,
Brian Johnston, Brian Parr,
Brianna Maria McKenzie, Bryce Pullen,
Bridget Ganey, Buddy Sayles,
Bush, Button, Byron Callan,
Caden the Dingo, Kate Seath,
Caleb Romo, Callum Meginson,
Cameron Dillon, Cameron Ross,
Charismatic, Casey Explosion,
Cat Coupo, Kate, Chance Mims,
Chard Botham, Charles Sizz,
Charlie Hawley, Charlie Pepper,
Chloe Coopers, Chris Ragnacci,
Chrissy Dial, Christian Gatey,
Christopher Petroni, Christopher Waltz,
Christy Kamori, Chutney Ferret,
Kieran, CJ is a hot boy, hot boy, hot boy,
hot boy, hot boy, hot boy, hot boy,
Claire the Shambler, Cleaver Bacon,
Clown Shoes, Colin Andrew,
Colin Poche, Conor Wilkinson,
Conorain Keenan, Courtney Dewurst,
Crazy Wee Monkey, Crittersmai,
CT O'Connor, Daddy Corbin,
Dagmar Markerer, Dammit Joe,
Demousey, Dan Sparks,
Danny G, Darragh Exton,
Dark Lady Vanstar, Darkside Flame,
Darwin Harris, David Barrell,
David Christie, David Nguyen,
David Rose, Definitely Not a Robot,
Der Schilderich, Deus Ex Caffeine,
Devon's Hands Melt, Darloth,
Dubella Kaminsky, Dingus,
Dr. Mike, Dog Summercamp,
Domas Siodvitis, Dominic Gilfoyle,
Dominic Rocchio, Donnan, Donovan,
a person of interest, Doug Carroll,
DeVoe, Drake Lazarus,
Duncan Parker Newton Gaines,
Dungeons and Randomness, Dylan New,
Dylan Teagan, Dylan Wignall,
Ayton Goldstrom, Ella Carr,
LB, Eli Bosnick's favorite sex friend,
EliJF Winnibs, Eliza Kogan,
Elizabeth Hamilton, Elizabeth Kubiak,
Ellie Rogers, Elyse Kennedy,
Emily Crist, Emma, Emma McCartan,
Eric Davies, Eric Hunter,
Erica Oligas, Eric Wynn-Loll,
Erika Sanwa Subarashi-Ningindes,
Erin Almas, Etancel,
Eugene Butler, Evan, Evan Hill,
Evan Ritchie, Fantaboy15,
FatboyLikesCake, Findley Bowick-Copley,
Flagburner, Flarboo,
Phlebzy, Flexter McSignals,
Florian Nox, 40 Tentacles,
Frick aka UnironicLove4Sonic,
Gabriel Savita Ramirez,
Garrett Gutierrez, Gary Marshall,
Gottseinvater, Gracie Lipscomb,
Greg Day, Haley,
Haldur Olufsen, Handsome Unlimited,
Hannah Rees, Happy Kitty,
Hash Brown, Hattie Masters,
Havelocks Miggles, Heal Al Gankovic,
Henry Dolling, Hilary Thomas,
Heal Webden, Hiram, Hero R. War,
Hudson Haywood, Ian Earle,
I Does Not, Imraft,
Industrial Robot, I Rock As In Granite,
Isaac Silbert, Izette the Transcripted
Who Stole Your Bones,
Jack Alderton, Jack Arnon,
Jack Davies, Jackie Scroggs,
Jacob Brood Shoemaker Hamblin Pike,
Jacob Martinson, Jay Levy,
Jake Nicholson, Jacob Bruins,
Jacob Homan, James Adair,
James Duncan Pfeiffer, James King,
James Ronald, James Stowe,
James Wormsley, James Williams,
James Edwards, Jamie Wallace,
Jane Lusby, Janet Computerface,
Scruffy64, Jasmine,
Jason Harris, Jason Walter,
Jason's Rage, Jay Calder,
Jeffrey Theobald, Jeffrey Wickstrom,
Jelga, Jerry Terry, Jess Golt,
J.I. Mendaro, Jimmy Alessandrini,
Joe Tyler, Joanna Roy,
Joe Rowe, Ulinksys, John Stevenson,
John's Socks, John Cantwell,
John Fortescue, who I personally believe
to be a decent individual,
John Kieran, John Carlos Rivera,
Jonah Flam, Jonathan Wardill,
Jordan Tullis, Jordan Brown,
Joseph Earp, Josh,
Josh Doctor of Purgeology Beach,
Josh Thomas, Josh Watkins,
Josh the Cellist, Joshua Braddy,
Joshua Featherston, Joshua Hagen-Fenton,
Joshua Misrach, Julia Bershawnd,
Julian, Justin Dutch, Justin Whitney,
Cameron Fall of the Patriarchy,
Karl Marx Said Twink Writes,
Kat McIntyre, Kate Brock,
Kate J., Katherine Alma-Kaslin,
Keno Kintany, Kenan Ward,
Legolas underscore Katan,
Kevin Thurber, Kit Foley,
Cold Beans, Commissars,
KP, Chris, Krista Wallace,
K. Zvezdorov, Ladies Making Comics,
Lance Manley, Sorcerer of Sin,
Lauren, Laurence Hutton-Smith,
Lavinia, Leftist Tech Support,
Leah Schuster, Lina,
Letters and Punctuation,
Let the Loser Melt, Lester Alfruth,
Lewis McDermott, Lightcraft Mini Paint Studio,
Lindsey Bowser, Lint,
Logan Mears, Loveling,
Loan Deneve, Lucas Marcelli,
Lucy X, Luke Swanson,
Luz Foltex, M. Allen,
Masill, Mackenzie,
Malav Shah, Mallow,
Malpertwee, Mar, Mario Babich,
Mark Boules, Mark Smith,
Matheson Bailey, Matt Feenan,
Matthew E. Cooper, Matthew Maggs,
Matthew Scalort, Max W.,
McBrix, McMuster,
Mechashiva, Megan Bond,
Megan Cahill, Meg Mazel,
Mel is my favorite fan especially because they're non-binary,
Me Napfeast, Mert Ist Mein Baba,
Michael Campbell, Michael Curtis,
Michael H. Prey, Michal Jarns,
Michelle Bearheart, Microsoftinator,
Mike Jeffcott, Mike Wayne,
Milo, Mippet, Mitt,
Morpho Portis, Mother's Basement,
My Waitin' Nudes, Nako Nakoni,
Naoto Shirogane, Nathan Beam,
Nazi Destroyer, Nathan Hoare,
Nathaniel P. Graham, Niala Earnswer,
Neverminder, Nick Abigail,
Nick Fidion, Nick Pollard,
Ugalinu Entufi, Ningen's Wit Attitudes,
Nolan Segrist, Nullrush,
Ocarina Solo, Octonian,
Ushand, Omari Anthony,
Otter, Owen Piper,
Paige Dwight, Pandacaby,
Parker Vincent, Parsnips,
Patrick Brown, Patrick Morrison,
Patrick Poitras, Paz Brook,
Pelops, Pendrakan,
Peng J. Howell, Perry Lewin,
Pete Asick, Peter Brodeson,
Peter Wunder, Petra McCartney,
Philip Metzger, Phobos2390,
Phoenix Moonbeam, Piss.gif,
Poplar, Preston Michelizio,
Previous Mammoth, Psy43,
Quay, Team Alfk,
Qui-Gon Jinn, Good Night Sweet Prince,
Rachel Anne, Recovering Zombie,
Red Rosa, Rhys Adams,
Reginald Buttersfinkter,
Renbymon, Rhythm, Richard Pearson,
Riley Knight, Ro Morris,
Rob Rose, Robert Ankeny,
Robin Veitch, Rocket Owl,
Rory Olek, Ross Schlieke,
Ryan Meaney, Ryan Vienno,
Rylan Hudson, S.M.,
Sage Summer, Sace,
Salem Alarak, Sam Glass,
Sam M. Keane, Samael,
Samuel Baker, Samuel Vergara Ekman,
Sarah Yertkvist, Saria Melody,
Scott Girton, Scramp Shortfriend,
Seamus Usarian, A Serpent Perplexed,
Sean Locke, Sebastian Emanuelson,
Sebastian Lorenzo, Sebastian Simon,
Seeker of Light, Shana Hansen,
Shane Smith, Shane Boyles,
Sheena Artrip, Shikon Neko,
Shining Star Justice,
Siegfried Pinzer, Silas Pumpkins,
Sillabub Cosplay, Silverwolf,
Sir Monday, SJ,
Sly Bones, Snazgool,
Sol, Spencer St. James,
Spicy Fun Dip, Squid Heart,
Starboy, Stardust Ultima,
Steven Notley, Sugarcane,
Summit Dreams, Super Depressing Lifestyle Championship Edition,
Super Kate, Super Dark 33,
Suppercut, Sven Lorenz,
Swamp Selkie, Sidney Steverson,
Sincione Breskell, Sebastian Demel,
Taternator, Talk Gibberish,
Tapio Unto Oskari Turonen,
Tower and the Exile,
Ted Teddington Tedsville,
That Flying Scotsman,
the 4,000th Yamaha DX7 Trent Reznor broke
with his mic stand or foot,
the Biophone, the D-Pad,
the Derbinator, the immortal science
of dialectical materialism,
the specter of communism,
the Cinemom, Thinkoplex,
This Drawing of a Tiger,
Thomas Frey, Thomas Kent,
Thornton Prime, Three Possums in a Trench Coat
Pretending to be a Human,
Thunter, Tiaz, Timmy Elverton,
Timothy Crowley, Tom Pinckney,
Tom Thurigood, Torbjörn Auglund-Wilhelmsen,
Translated Leek, Trix,
Trikodin, Tristan Young,
Tirpid, Tyler Nunes,
Unsurpassed Travesty,
Velastrius, Velath,
V. Hoffman, Vesco,
Vincit Omnia, Wackman,
Wiebke, William Case,
William Moore, William Nelson,
Willow H., Wisk,
XXEmoSamuraiXX,
YGrek32, You're Good Boy,
Yurix, Yvonne with a smiley face,
Zachary Prokowski,
Zach Radley, Zemmler,
Zenny, Zero Anonymity,
Zoe, Zoe Burke,
Orn Magnus Palsson, and finally,
honestly, I'm just curious what you'll do with my name.
