Uh, our little intro bumper this week comes courtesy of Tone Rebellion.
Ahem.
In his house at R'lyeh, dead Cthulhu waits, dreaming of her.
So we're gonna do things a little bit different this week.
Uh, we'll get to the comments after we talk about the outlines.
Most of the comments are suggestions on name and that sort of thing.
So, uh, first things first.
Let's talk about what we've nailed down so far of the Outlaw Heads monstrosity.
Uh, well, the opening should definitely be of her dreaming a very literal dream.
Mm.
Um, that's gonna tell you exactly what's gonna come.
Um.
Our story proper starts in our little Innsmouth town.
Which is a university town.
Yeah, and literally everyone's parents work at the university.
And so the major employer of the surrounding five towns.
Lego, Brick, and Ethnic Third Wheel have been the best of friends for as long as they commit
and remember.
That's why she has no interest in him at all, because he's like a brother.
He's like a brother.
He inherits this family heirloom, which we later find out to be the Necronomicon, and
trying to impress her, he shows it to her, and she's like, well, let's fucking read it,
and they do.
Mm.
The next day, school starts.
Uh-huh.
And hottie McChestabs.
Yeah, shows up.
Well, not even, he doesn't even show up.
He's just like, he's looking at them across, like, the parking lot or something.
Yeah, he's just there.
And Ethnic Third Wheel is super threatened by him immediately.
So when's the point, um, that she starts having her, uh, her artistic endeavors that aren't
actually her ability, just force of habit?
I think, like, like, that night, like, after they read from it.
And she's, she like, maybe draws a picture of, like, this really hot guy.
Mm.
But there's a lot of monstrous stuff in the background.
Yeah.
Like, there's tentacles.
This is just, like, my dream.
Yeah, except for without the tentacles.
Yeah, like, she sees this really hot guy with, like, a mass of tentacles behind him, and
she's, like, horrified and turned on by this dream that, you know, I sleep drew.
Yeah, so then one day, they're, they're at, like, a pool party, because it's still hot.
Because it's still, you know.
She, she has terrible hydrophobia, by the way.
She hates water.
She, she'll even joke about, like, in a self-deprecating way that she can't even take a bath.
One day, we're at a pool party, and some guy, playfully being a jackass, like, pushes her in.
Yeah, one of her, like, pull her in with him, and be, like, dunking her, and, like,
threatening to, like, untie her bathing suit or something.
Like, super.
No, I don't think it should be that, that threatening.
I think it should be, like, innocent.
Okay, okay.
It should be just, like, he's, like, yeah, he's, like, horse-playing with her, like, come on.
Yeah.
And, and, like, immediately Cthulhu gets, like, that protective rage and just drives
him insane.
And so, like, he, you know, for the rest of his life is, like, a shrieking vegetable.
Yeah.
Which they'll blame on drugs.
Yeah, and, and Cthulhu, hot Cthulhu will never be held accountable.
Yes.
Lego brick will never, never be troubled by this.
Be like, you did this?
Wow, you're so powerful.
What are you?
Yeah, after this point, they need to have, like, their savior in the hospital.
Yeah.
Not in the hospital, but, like, he, he pisses her off somehow.
Like, he, she's, like, I know something's up with you.
And he's, like, you should never know.
Of course, but before all this, though, we're also introduced to the woman who will become
the villain, who we've decided should be an adult.
Yeah.
Who works at the university.
She's, like, an adjunct.
Yeah, you know, and she's, like, super hot.
Yeah.
And Lego brick is immediately threatened by how hot she is.
But she should be described as this beautiful, gorgeous woman who has a desperate look to
her eye.
Yeah.
Like, and not just because, like, she's, like, this cult leader, but also because she's a
woman scorned.
Yeah, we, like, she, she'll often be described as a woman scorned.
But we'll never, ever, ever say why.
No one will ever talk to us.
She might be scorned.
What, what, who scorned her?
Why she was scorned.
I feel like, I feel like Neil, Uncle Neil should know the story, but he never tells it.
Yeah, he's just like, oh, I know her.
I just like, that's an interesting story.
And then they get distracted by something else.
Yeah, so then she ends up at a college party, like, and of course, she, like,
drinks too much.
Like, or she doesn't realize, like, she's drinking alcohol.
Like, I thought this was iced tea.
Yeah, wow.
So this, I've never been to Long Island before.
At the college party, drinks too much, gets almost raped.
Yeah.
Cthulhu saves her from the almost rape.
Again, we have another blithering insanity case, which gets blamed on drugs.
On drugs.
It's mostly bath salts.
It gets blamed on drugs.
Yeah.
And then it's topical.
It'll turn into, like, 21 Jump Street, like, on a subplot that we never see.
And then, like, they're real, like, hardcore.
He, like, phantoms her and kidnaps her and takes her into, like, his, I don't know, local lair.
And she finds out the whole truth about the prophecy and how I don't want to devour you
anymore.
He does some really fucked up shit, like, kidnap her, holds her against her will, probably
holds her down.
She goes, no, no, no, but really, yes.
Yeah.
And so now that, and he's like, I don't want to, you know, devour your body and soul.
Uh, what are we gonna do?
We're gonna stop this prophecy.
So they go to Uncle Nyarlathotep.
I'm so excited about Uncle Nyarlathotep.
Special thanks to Dylan Turn for this one, uh, that, uh, Nyarlathotep, he's, like, this,
the most awesome character.
He's, like, an old hippie or something.
And he runs this Lovecraft basic cult shop.
And he talks all the time about he and Nikola Tesla would go freak out this racist cult
horror writer.
And basically people will think, why the hell is this book not about Nyarlathotep, like,
completely?
Yeah.
And his, like, madcap adventures, like, among humanity.
And he'll start, like, he'll keep alluding to them.
And our, our main characters with no interest at all.
So, or they'll, like, they'll be like, it'll be like, that's a great story.
So back to, like, what I love.
And then meanwhile, our, you know, hot villainous is a woman scorned.
Yes.
And it turns out she's the cult leader.
Yeah.
And eventually ethnic third wheel, who has been nothing but threatened by Cthulhu this
whole time.
And rightfully so, because he's a piece of fuck.
Shit gets real when ethnic third wheel, uh, goes to the hot cult leader and gets brainwashed.
He goes right away and makes a point of this, that the bad guy be portrayed as slutty and
have her seduce Indian third wheel to get him on their side.
That way we can double down on the weird sexual politics by having the main character be completely
passive and also slut shaming the villain and having sexually assertive women be the
ultimate evil.
Yeah.
Can do.
And so basically like the third act will be all about stopping brainwashed ethnic third
wheel and slutty villainous from, uh, uh, you know, using their cult powers to, uh,
you know, summon the greater evil, which is, I guess, Azathoth.
And, uh, that is our plot.
Let the terrible details commence.
The reason we're doing comment seconds is because there was a lot of little details
instead of big sweeping ones that we could divide by theme.
So let's see what we got.
We got a lot.
And again, highlights reel.
Sorry for people who didn't get it.
And it was a lot and especially the scenes, which are awesome and we love.
And, uh, yeah, here, here's some suggestions from Andrew Green that I like.
Denny F.
Bridge is an anagram of bitchy friend.
Uh, Kate S.
Fiddick is an anagram of bat sidekick.
I kind of like the Kate Fiddick.
Kate Fiddick.
Yeah.
It even kind of sounds fat.
Yeah.
Fat and annoying.
It's actually quite a pleasant character.
Yeah.
And he's actually probably the best friend you'll ever have.
But yeah, you know, our, yeah, our, our, our Lego brick is threatened by all.
We got a lot of votes for Bianca.
Bianca Slate.
Yeah.
And Slate is good, but Bianca Slate's a little too on the nose.
Yeah.
Same with Tabula Rasa.
Yeah.
I mean, as much as I love Bianca Slate and you love Tabula Rasa, it is just a little
too on the nose.
Well, uh, among others, um, Melodia E.
McIntyre wrote that Penelope, uh, the character from The Honesty is known for remaining chased,
waiting for her one true love while 108 men want her desperately.
Um, and also she could go by Penny because she hates her name.
Cause it's weird.
Um, I love the idea of it being Penelope.
It's the idea of waiting.
Yeah.
I like.
Or Rasa.
Or Rasa.
Or heart.
You know, cause going for a nice like soft, cause it's all about love.
We had a lot of funny, uh, like title ones.
Kalok Stevens suggests chartreuse whispers.
Sean Simonis.
I have, um, Verdant Dreams.
Olivine Nights.
As well as Malachite Visions.
Oh, I like the, uh, the idea of using things like, uh, uh, Verdigris or Viridian.
Yeah.
Those are good bees.
Gregory Loscalzo reminds us that, uh, verdigris, according to Wikipedia, is a common name for a
green pigment obtained through, uh, the natural patina formed when copper, brass, or bronze is
weathered.
So that could like, you know.
That works really well.
That could indicate that we have no idea what this word verdigris actually means.
Yeah.
I, uh, I like the idea of at least one of the chapters being undertow.
And submerged.
Dark Waters suggests Bethany Hough.
Could be a good one.
Laura Backus suggests, uh, Rain of Darkness, Dark Fate, Book of Fate, Low Tide, Riptide.
Dark Waters.
Elizabeth Smith suggested Love Lies Dreaming, possibly followed by sequels Love Awakens
and so on.
I was noticing a lot of comments, um, for example, from Jet Black that, um, like Cthulhu
as being part of the swim team as being a thing.
And while that would be hilarious, I think the problem with that is that that actually
makes him too social.
Yeah, a little too jockey.
I think he's like.
Active in the community.
Yeah, it's like, well, the thing is, it's like, Edward is so super powerful.
Like Christian Grey is obviously, like, very active.
Yeah.
But in solitary ways.
Yeah, we want an angel from Buffy.
We don't want a Riley.
Although we had, yeah, we, we, we did have a lot of suggestions that Hot Cthulhu's name
is Riley.
Like, Ru-ya.
However, that's pronounced.
Yeah.
Ru-ya.
Which I think is a great idea.
I really like Riley.
Jamie of Needs More Gay Fame, uh, suggested Sonya Slate as the protagonist.
Um, we liked the idea of, um, Lego Bricks mom and dad being named Sonya and Howard after
H.P. and his wife, Sonya.
Dr. Rice suggested that, uh, we got some sort of ominous catchphrase that the cult keeps
saying that never gets explained.
Like, this is the twilight of the universe or something.
Yes.
Can do.
Another one from Dylan Turn that, uh, Hot Cthulhu, whenever she's having those dreams,
it's actually him possessing her body.
And she likes it because he's always inside her.
It's like I, I was using you and she's like, but I liked it.
So good job, internet.
We're about to the point where we can start, uh, accepting applications for, uh, our ghost
riders.
And I guess I should preface this by saying we're going to have five, maybe six, and,
uh, a backup or two in case anyone flakes.
Uh, so there, there will not be many because this is only a 70,000 word novel and we're
having ghost writers do chunks of it just so we can have a quicker turnover than it
would take to actually write a novel.
But basically, uh, if you can, if you think you could write 5,000 to 10,000 words in two
weeks and I, four or five days of nano.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
It's like four or five days of nano.
If you could do a NaNoWriMo, you could do this.
Please don't apply if you can't turn around 10,000 words in two weeks.
And we are paying for this.
We'll tell you the rate once we, uh, you know, get you on board.
So the way this is going to work is you send us a writing sample at this email address
that I've totally made by today.
Uh, it with the contact information, your email address, a way to get in touch with
you and, uh, no more than 250 word scene based on, uh, some of the scenes we've read.
Just anything that you feel captures your voice.
A scene involving our two leads.
Yeah.
Or ethnic third wheel.
Or the parents.
Slutty antagonists.
Um, or, or cool uncle Neil or cool uncle Neil who I'd read the shit out of those.
Gets the hell ignored out of him.
Make the subject line 50 shades of green sample.
And again, don't do this if you can't churn out 10,000 words in two weeks.
And we're not going to respond to comments on our episode next week.
Next week we're going to talk about location.
Not really responding to comments because we're gonna spend the next two weeks, uh,
wading through our, uh, samples.
Mm-hmm.
And, uh, so.
Finalizing an outline.
Yeah.
Finalizing the outline.
So two weeks from now we will have, uh, answers as to who we are going to bring on board and
what our final outline will be.
And again, remember to check for updates at shayapocalypse.com and follow us on Twitter
at Shayapocalypse or at Sexy Alien Book where I retweet the funny things people say at me.
And remember, friends, we do this for you, but we do this for literature.
Because some things should not stand, but if they must, by God, we should at least make
something from it.
Something that we can look at and say, I might not be proud of it, but it might make me a
few bucks on the side.
And isn't that what it's all about?
Wading!
