Previous videos showed how the earth's sedimentary rocks are like the pages of a book, taking
us back through time.
Nineteenth century geologists discovered that the lowest and oldest layers contained a small
variety of very primitive marine species.
Higher sedimentary layers held more varied and more complex creatures.
The progression suggested that these animals didn't appear suddenly but were gradually
evolving.
But there were sudden disappearances.
This layer of rock, for example, marks a catastrophic mass extinction about 250 million years ago.
The rocks below this line are full of marine fossils but in the rocks above they're all
gone.
There were five global mass extinctions we know of, each one wiping out between 50 and
95% of species.
Each was followed by the gradual recolonization of the earth by surviving organisms that again
began to change and become more complex until the next mass extinction.
If this increasing complexity really did mean some kind of evolution, we'd expect to see
it in individual species as we track their fossils through millions of years of sedimentary
rock.
And we do.
Either each species is suddenly being killed off, only to be replaced by the sudden appearance
of something that's almost identical, or we're seeing the changing morphology of a single
species through time.
We also expect to see traces of an animal's evolutionary ancestry in its morphology today,
and we do.
Take a look at this skeleton of an ape's hand.
It looks just like a human hand, except it's not.
In fact, it's not an ape's hand either.
It's a whale's hand, or at least what used to be a hand in its ancestral past and is
now used as a flipper.
The morphology of animals today is full of remnant body parts that have been changed
and adapted, just as evolution predicts.
In a video on natural selection, I showed how a hypothetical animal might evolve into
two different species.
At first the two types would be able to reproduce, then reproduce with difficulty, and then not
reproduce at all.
We can't watch it happening in mammals today because it takes several thousand generations,
but we can see snapshots of it frozen in time.
Modern horses, for example, separated from zebras several million years ago.
They can still reproduce, but with difficulty, because a horse's DNA has 64 chromosomes
and a zebra's 44.
When an offspring is produced, it's sterile, exactly what evolution would predict.
An even better example is found around mountains, where a species evolves as it spreads geographically.
Each species can interbreed with the one next to it, but the species at each end of the
line can't interbreed with each other.
With organisms with very fast reproduction rates, such as bacteria and flies, separation
into new species has indeed been seen.
This for example is a flavobacterium that eats nylon.
It was found in a waste outlet near a Japanese factory that produces the stuff.
The problem is nylon was only invented in 1935 and is completely synthetic and undigestible
to other bacteria.
Does this fit perfectly with evolution, and they evolve because of a mutation some time
between the invention of nylon and their discovery 40 years later?
The answer came when researchers kept a completely different bacterium in a similar nylon-rich
environment and the same mutation occurred.
DNA research has only added to the overwhelming evidence of evolution, but it's also completely
shaken up the evolutionary tree and shown in much greater detail which animals share
a common ancestor and when they separated.
Ancestors are now manipulating DNA to discover a treasure trove of evolutionary information.
It's long been known that ancestral traits buried deep inside DNA can get switched on
by accident with very obvious results, but they can also now be deliberately switched
on in research labs.
Chickens for example don't have teeth, but their distant ancestors did and the code for
it is still buried in their DNA.
Activate the right gene and you get a chicken with teeth.
One of the commonest misconceptions about evolution is that we never find a transitional
form between one species and another.
But the fossil record is full of animals changing from one kind into another.
It's one of the reasons we know evolution happened.
Every animal is a transition between what went before and what comes after.
If you think we haven't captured the instantaneous moment that one species turns into another,
that's because there isn't one.
It's like asking where's the intermediate form between this and this?
We know that this species existed at one time and is now gone and it seems to have been
replaced by this species.
We can scour the archives and dig up as many transitional photos of George Bush as we like,
but we're never going to find a single shot of Dubya changing from a baby into a man.
What we will find are the various transitional forms in between.
If you're talking about gaps in the record, sure, there are lots of them.
This is all I could find when I googled images from the life of George Bush, so of course
there are gaps.
If I went on a digging expedition I could probably find a hundred more, but even if
I had a thousand chronologically spaced photos of George Bush, there would still be gaps
in between.
As I mentioned in the last video, we now know that evolution, just like the growth of George
Bush, doesn't happen evenly.
The few years in between this photo and this one mark very few changes, but there's been
a huge change in the same period of time between this photo and this one.
But even when evolution happens quickly it's still not instantaneous.
For some animals we've got a very good fossil record and the time gaps between fossils are
small.
This shows evolution very clearly.
For other animals the gaps are longer and the record is far less complete.
Yes, I get that a lot.
A theory in scientific nomenclature is the highest form of proof you can get.
To go any higher you have to enter the realm of mathematics.
In all the sciences there's still a lot more to discover, a lot more to understand and
a lot more to explain, whether it's atomic theory, the theory of gravity or the theory
of evolution.
These are all called theories, so if you don't understand what a theory is in scientific
terms then they're what you would call facts.
And using common terminology evolution is a fact.
It's so much a fact that researchers now depend on evolutionary theory to study antibiotic
resistance and crop pests and new diseases and to develop new drugs.
Understanding evolution isn't just important for understanding our past, but our future.
