♪♪
♪♪
Ah-ha-ha-ha!
Don't worry. Vaccines are perfectly safe.
According to me, you might notice a little prick.
Ah-ha-ha-ha!
Ah-ha-ha-ha!
Ah-ha!
Ugh.
Hello, and welcome back to hell.
I'm just vaccinating my profiteroles,
immunizing them against the horrendous disease
known only as not-enough-cream,
itis.
Unfortunately, while vaccines are great
at stimulating my balls,
in humans, they've become quite the controversial topic.
In the late 90s, an anti-vaccine movement
started to pick up steam,
claiming that they cause autism.
And the movement has plenty of washed-up celebrities
flushing it, including What's-His-Name
and that one
and some more.
Here's 45th President of the United States,
Donald Trump, coming out against...medicine.
He once famously tweet,
No more massive injections.
Tiny children are not horses.
I mean, of course they aren't.
Horses aren't even real.
But if there's an entire movement of people
with documentaries and websites and Facebook pages
with thousands and thousands of members
backed by the former U.S. president,
why does everyone else seem to think
they're obviously wrong?
Has the mainstream medical establishment
science-cucked a majority of people
into thinking they're safe
so they can keep making money selling them?
The vaccine debate is complex
and multilayered
and hasn't been resolved for over two decades.
So obviously it needs me to come and put an end to it
in the space of a single YouTube video
by doing what I'm best at,
destroying things with my mouth.
Oh!
Oh!
Oh!
Mm!
Oh!
Oh, hi, Mum.
Was I vaccinated?
Have you been looking into moving out lately, son?
Mm.
Now, the clever clogs among you
will know that there was an anti-vaccine movement
of sorts in the 1800s when they were first introduced,
but that movement died out on its own a long time ago.
Oh, smallpox.
The main argument in the modern movement
is that they might cause autism.
So let's see what, on paper, this claim is supported by.
Yes, I just ended a sentence with a preposition,
and if that annoyed you, we get it.
Your school was expensive.
We're all very happy for you.
Part one, the easy version,
in case you don't feel like watching
this whole fucking video.
In 1998, a study came out alleging a link
between the MMR vaccine and autism.
MMR vaccinates against measles, mumps, and rubella,
which saves kids from having to get multiple painful shots
and parents from having to know what rubella is.
It was published in the Lancet,
a very well-known medical journal,
which made it seem credible.
However, the paper was eventually found guilty
of being bad.
The science turned out to be bonkers,
and multiple other studies on literally millions of children
did not show that there was a link,
and the paper was eventually retracted
by the journal that published it.
So retracted that it literally has
retracted written all across every page
in big red letters.
My printer just does black and white,
so I've actually got an artist's impression
of the real version.
So far, that's some pretty shaky ground
on the anti-vaccine side,
but later, new evidence came out that...
Oh, that's it. That's all the evidence.
This segment is over now.
Part two, the existential horror of...
Wait, that's it?
No, seriously, that's all the evidence.
There is nothing else even remotely credible.
There are some fringe pet theories
as to what chemical in the vaccines causes the autism,
but since vaccines don't cause autism,
they're kind of putting the cart before the squid here.
The anti-vax movement had next to no evidence 20 years ago,
and now they have even less.
But hold on there, Daddy-O.
Sure, you can sum up the entire issue in 52 seconds.
Wow. But really, I don't think that's good enough.
Everyone who's anti-vax at this point
has probably already heard
and isn't convinced by the easy version.
I mean, if you're on the fence about vaccines,
you're not gonna change your mind
because someone told you there was a paper once
but it got retracted,
no matter how much they pitch-shift
their voice in post.
Blue crash.
But what if you did want to change someone's mind
on topics like this?
The data on this issue is discouraging.
Research shows that when someone becomes
personally invested in an idea,
they can become very closed-minded,
or worse, a YouTuber.
Political science professor Brendan Nyhan
and his team spent three years
studying how over 1,700 parents
reacted to various different attempts
to convince them to vaccinate their children
and found that no matter what they tried,
parents who started out against vaccination
didn't change their minds,
and worse, trying to correct false claims
about vaccines actually made some parents
more against vaccinating.
Nyhan told the New Yorker,
it's depressing.
We were definitely depressed.
Now, as a fellow fan of logic and reason,
I'm also doing great,
but in today's particular, shall we say,
socioeconomic climate,
it's extra pressing that we figure out
how to get everyone on the same page
with regards to public health.
So the purpose of this video isn't just
to point out a group that's wrong about something.
The real question is,
when someone is wrong about something,
not just this, how do you change their mind?
Now, personally, I'm not sure how to do that.
If it was easy for humans to change their mind
about stuff, then this video wouldn't need to exist,
would it? But maybe we'll find some answers
by exploring what convinced people
vaccines might be dangerous in the first place.
We should probably begin with that old 1998 study
because, let's be honest,
how many people on either side of this discussion
have actually read it?
People don't read scientific papers.
They check out the blogs or videos of people
who they already agree with,
and they tell them what the science said.
And I mean, same.
I heard all the other people say the science was bad,
and I believed them.
And the anti-vax people probably just believed
whoever told them it was true.
So to be unbiased about this,
let's really start at the beginning.
Look at the original paper.
That's the wrong page.
Let's actually read this old paper
and see what it has to say
and come to an honest conclusion about its findings.
Five minutes later.
What the fuck?
This is why people are against vaccines?
This is the worst fucking paper I've ever read in my life!
♪♪
♪♪
Ah.
Right, let's talk about the study.
I'm calling it the study because its real title
was Ileal Lymphoid Nodular Hyperplasia,
Nonspecific Colitis,
and Pervasive Developmental Disorder in Children,
which is a bit of a tongue twister.
I had to do a not insignificant amount of Googling
to find out whether it's pronounced Ileal or I-leal.
Don't know why I bothered. If I got it wrong,
it's not like you would have noticed.
The paper's lead author is Dr. Andrew Wakefield.
I'm sorry. There's a mistake in my script.
The paper's lead author is disgraced ex-Dr. Andrew Wakefield.
Wakefield is seen by many as the founder
of the modern anti-vaccine movement
since he was behind the paper that started the whole thing.
Let's keep an eye on that guy. Oh, fucking!
The smoke machine occasionally goes off on its own
for no reason, and I can't be bothered to get up.
The paper's supposed purpose was to investigate
a connection between bowel disorders
and developmental issues in children,
in particular targeting signs of autism.
So first off, what's a colitis?
Right, uh, hold on.
Okay, colitis is inflammation of the colon,
one of the main symptoms of bowel diseases
like Crohn's disease, for example.
Colitis. By the way, we're gonna use words
like bowel, colon, and intestine
interchangeably in this video.
Don't let it confuse you. They're mostly the same thing.
If you're a doctor, pretend you didn't hear that.
The paper says non-specific colitis
because it's not looking for specific kinds of inflammation.
It's looking at whatever inflammation
these children happen to have and seeing how they compare
because maybe they're all linked,
and maybe they're even linked to the autism.
According to Wakefield, he just happened to notice
a lot of kids with both autism and bowel disorders,
and he launched the study to investigate a possible link.
Ah!
But what does all that have to do with vaccines?
I mean, surely it must have found something
for it to have caused all this controversy.
Well, allow me to list the paper's
highly scientific findings.
Some of the parents of the children in the study
think they remember the autism symptoms
starting after the MMR vaccine.
No, really, that's it.
Findings.
Onset of behavioral symptoms was associated by the parents
with measles, mumps, and rubella vaccination.
For literally decades, right,
I've been hearing about this paper,
and I've assumed that there must have been something there,
like something to at least explore or discuss or debunk.
Everyone lost their fucking minds over it,
so surely there's something, and I finally go and read it,
and it's just a bunch of fucking parents' opinions.
There's just nothing there!
I can't fucking believe this!
♪♪
Like, seriously, the disconnect
between the attempts at real science
and the stuff the parents think they remember
is, like, so jarring.
Like, next to colonoscopies and biopsies
and graphs of urinary excretions,
you'll suddenly get sentences like...
He received a dose of measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine,
the day after which his mother described
a striking deterioration in his behavior
that she did link with the immunization.
A note from your mother isn't science.
It's how you get out of P.E.
I'm sorry, coach. I didn't really have polio.
Ah, maybe some home decorating will relax me.
I love this poster because I'm smart,
and now all my guests will know I'm smart.
I have tons of guests. I'm a party animal.
I have a charisma of at least six.
Uh.
-♪♪
-♪♪
-♪♪
-♪♪
I wonder why the economists interviewed Contrapoints
and not me.
There. Perfect.
Does that look all right to you?
No, Rachel, don't wave the camera.
That's not how people communicate.
Page three of the study provides a table
listing each child's behavioral diagnosis,
largely autism, and also what their parents identified
as their exposure,
the thing which, in their opinion,
caused the diagnosis.
Of course, most of them blame the vaccine.
Now, while a bunch of opinions
are about as useful in science as a bath made of teeth,
we might as well explore how someone
might end up having that opinion.
♪♪
It's actually really common for us to...
Actually, hey, Angie?
Yeah?
Could you draw me as a ferret, please?
Okay. Why?
I will not explain why.
It's actually really common for us to assume
two things that happened to us around the same time
must be caused by one another.
That's how we as ape people whose fur fell off one day
think about things with our tiny,
godless little monkey brains.
If you ate some strange new berries
and got sick that day,
you're basically programmed to connect the two
for the sake of your own survival.
This is the one in ten times
that evolutionary psychology is real.
The rest are fake, Malcolm,
but these correlations we make in our heads
between events aren't necessarily true.
It might not have been the berries.
It could have been all the budget energy drinks
you import from Thailand.
You know what? Maybe you can have too much carabao.
Another big problem here is how humans
relate to spans of time,
just like how under quarantine
you might not even notice four months passing
because nothing happens anymore.
If someone coughs on you today
and later in the evening you start to feel a bit sick,
a lot of people might remember being coughed on
and assume that's how they got it,
but illnesses can take days or weeks to incubate.
Maybe you don't remember the time you got coughed on
two weeks ago by the guy who was delivering
the last crate of energy drinks.
Oh, carabao, why is it so hard to quit you?
Win football tickets?
I can't wait to be in a crowd of people again.
Ah-ha-ha-ha!
The table claims some of the parents
noticed the symptoms a few weeks, days,
or even hours after getting the vaccine,
but I do have to wonder how easy it is
for someone to recall something as complex
as the exact date of the onset
of a child's behavioral symptoms.
A BBC documentary from back in the day
interviewed a parent and they said on camera
that their son became autistic overnight after the vaccine.
What happened to your other son?
Overnight. He had the fever, the high temperature.
Literally overnight. He was never the same again.
Even the interviewer was like,
literally? Literally overnight?
Like, are you sure?
The signs of autism appear gradually
and grow over time.
When parents first take notice,
there could easily be other signs they missed.
Another better documentary about all this
we'll get to later actually found parents
who realized they'd made this exact mistake.
Stacey and Damien no longer believe
that their daughter's autism was caused by MMR.
After researching and remembering Rebecca as a baby,
they realized that she had already shown symptoms
before she was vaccinated.
Parents don't necessarily notice the symptoms
until they're fairly obvious,
but that doesn't mean the symptoms weren't there
or their child wasn't autistic beforehand.
I'm bringing this up because it's important
to make the distinction that whenever someone describes
something like their child's first symptom,
what they are really describing is the first symptom
they personally noticed.
Here's a timeline of the first two years
of a child's development.
Statistically, the average age
that symptoms of autism become noticeable to parents
is around 12 to 18 months.
Children in the UK receive a dose of the MMR vaccine
from between 12 to 15 months.
Isn't it possible that these parents
are blaming a coincidental event?
You can even see evidence that this happens in the paper
because some of the other parents
blame other totally coincidental events.
One of them blames their child's autism on an ear infection
they got a week before they first noticed the symptoms.
Do ear infections cause autism now?
No.
No. Of course not,
but if it was the only other thing
that you remembered happening to your child,
you can see how someone might end up
assuming they're related.
Before this study was released,
there were a few very small clusters of parents
that thought vaccines caused autism or other illnesses.
JABS, the Justice, Awareness, and Basic Support Group,
wow, they really worked hard to make their name say JABS,
had been around for a few years beforehand.
The founder of JABS, Jackie Fletcher,
asserts to this day that her son
suddenly became severely autistic
ten days after his MMR vaccination
and has frequently tried to sue the government
and MMR manufacturers for money over it.
It's important to recognize that statistically,
even if vaccines are perfectly safe,
you're going to get a small amount of parents like her
who are convinced that vaccines are harmful
because they got one right before
something like this happened.
Before there was a scientific paper
and thousands of news pieces telling them to,
there really weren't that many parents
of autistic children who blamed the vaccine.
According to a pro-JABS piece made in May 2002
when the scare was happening,
there were thousands of members,
but before all that, there were only about
30 sets of parents at best,
and speaking of groups being too small
to be statistically meaningful,
another big problem, or to put it another way,
a small problem, is sample size.
Ha ha ha, please hold your applause until the end.
On its own, a study of a small sample size
like 12 children can't prove anything
about the rest of a population.
I've made this point about people drawing
sweeping conclusions from small studies before.
However, it's important to understand
sample size criticisms in the proper context.
Studies on small groups happen all the time in science
for a good reason.
They're often called pilot studies,
and they're useful for figuring out
how a bigger study should work
in preparation for the real thing
or for checking to see if there's something
worth looking into in the first place.
A fraction of parents of the tens of millions
of children who've had this vaccine
saying they think there might be a connection
is at best grounds to do a better study
on a bigger group of children to find out
if this connection actually exists.
We're going to come back to this later
because someone had the opportunity
to do one of those,
and what they did with that opportunity
is very interesting.
That was an awful take. Let me do that again.
In summary, the science is really bad.
It's bonkers.
The study even admits it doesn't prove anything at the end.
We did not prove an association
between measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine
and the syndrome described.
The next sentence is hilarious.
Virological studies are underway
that may help to resolve this issue.
The issue being that they don't have any proof.
In science, it's expected to admit
the limitations of your study.
Papers and medical journals have high standards
for what constitutes solid proof.
However, Wakefield is using this as a shield.
By hiding behind the defense
that he hasn't claimed to prove anything,
he can then speculate about a lot of things
he hasn't proved.
For example, these children appear to share similar,
though nonspecific, bowel problems.
I say appeared because, well, we'll come back to that,
but Wakefield takes this vague collection
of similar things and concludes with the theory
that could make his career,
that the vaccine may cause autism
and it happens through the bowels.
We have identified a chronic enterocolitis in children
that may be related to neuropsychiatric dysfunction.
In most cases, onset of symptoms
was after measles, mumps, and rubella immunization.
Further investigations are needed to examine the syndrome
and its possible relation to this vaccine.
In literally the final sentences of the paper,
Wakefield invents a new disease
that combines bowel disorders and autism
and then speculates that MMR vaccination
might cause the disease he just made up.
This is absolutely buck wild, as some would put it.
It's like medical fan fiction.
Sure, he admitted it just may be
and said we need more research to prove anything,
but now his made-up disease
is in a published scientific paper
in one of the most prestigious medical journals
in the world.
Journalists with little to no scientific knowledge
go on to report on this paper
as if it's discovering this new disease.
Doctors at the Royal Free Hospital
believe they may have discovered a link
between the combination vaccine
and a bowel disease that can progress to autism.
What are you talking about?
He admitted he didn't prove anything
and then wildly speculated at the end.
No!
There is one last really weird thing
about this paper we haven't mentioned yet,
which most people don't seem to mention,
which I find a little bit weird
and indicates that no one has actually read it.
Towards the end of the paper,
ugh, Wakefield tries to find other papers
that kind of support his findings,
so he really has to scrape the bottom of the barrel.
Fudenberg noted that for 15 of 20 autistic children,
the first symptoms developed within a week of vaccination.
Wow!
That's a really interesting thing to...
urk, isn't it?
We should probably actually go read Fudenberg's paper
and see what it has to say for itself.
Fudenberg's 1996 paper cited here is from
Biotherapy, a fringe journal for quacks
that actually went out of business two years later.
The paper is a pilot study on the effects
of a substance called
dialysable lymphocyte extract on children with autism.
In addition to alleging that several of the children
had become autistic within a week of getting vaccinated,
are you ready for this?
Fudenberg claimed that this extract he'd created
could cure autism.
Of the 22 with classic autism,
10 became normal in that they were mainstreamed in school
and clinical characteristics were fully normalized.
Became normal!
Holy shit!
And you want to know something funny?
You want to know something funny?
At the time that the study was published,
Fudenberg didn't have a medical license.
It was revoked the year before
because he was caught stealing controlled substances
from his job for personal use.
The South Carolina Medical Board found him guilty
of engaging in dishonorable, unethical,
or unprofessional conduct.
He admitted he'd done it in the hearing too.
So he got caught stealing drugs,
admitted it, got fired, lost all credibility,
probably wasn't even allowed within 100 yards
of a stethoscope, and then a year later,
he cured autism, according to him.
And you know he's trustworthy because he admitted
to stealing all those medical supplies.
What I'm trying to say here is ex-Dr. Hugh Fudenberg's paper
is one of the most obviously bullshit things I've ever read.
And Wakefield had to cite it
to create a precedent for his findings.
This is the best he could get.
You can see why it's a bit weird
no one brings this up, right?
In scientific circles,
everyone who read Wakefield's paper,
or worse, bothered to check the sources it cited,
had, you know, a few minor concerns.
It was so concerning that The Lancet published
in the same issue a response to the paper.
Vaccine adverse events, causal or coincidental.
It points out numerous problems,
some of which we've discussed here already,
and has some words to say about fear-mongering
about vaccines like this.
Vaccine safety concerns,
such as that reported by Wakefield and colleagues,
may snowball into societal tragedies
when the media and the public confuse association
with causality and shun immunization.
This would be tragic because passion
would then conquer reason and the facts again in the UK.
This commentary would probably have seemed
darkly apocalyptic at the time,
but in retrospect,
it was a shockingly accurate prediction.
Like, they knew!
They fucking warned us!
So even before the paper was in the public eye,
other doctors and scientists were looking at it
and saying, this ain't it, chief.
Is that still a current reference?
I've aged 10 years in the last two weeks.
Time is meaningless.
But despite a lot of obvious concerns
and clear weaknesses,
Wakefield published the study anyway,
and then, and this is weird,
he immediately held a press conference about it.
This isn't something that anyone normally does in science,
especially not after publishing a five-page study
that admits it didn't prove anything.
The paper was so small and its findings so insignificant
that it barely even qualifies as a paper.
In fact, it was published in the Lancet as an early report.
See, the top left corner?
Zoom in on it.
It's there.
You gotta be quicker on the drill than that.
Holding a press conference for this
is something you do if you want attention
for your controversial paper,
not if you're trying to do science,
and here's where the whole thing really started.
During the press conference,
Wakefield pretended his study had discovered
a risk so earth-shaking
that the government should stop using the MMR vaccine
and replace it with measles, mumps,
and rubella vaccines given separately.
One more case of this is too many.
We put children at no greater risk
if we dissociate those vaccines into three,
but we may be averting the possibility of this problem.
This is the moment that changed everything.
Wakefield told a room full of reporters
that based on his study,
he felt the MMR vaccine could be putting millions
of children at risk.
The mainstream media were in love with the notion
that the paper had found something,
so they ran with it all the way into hell.
♪♪
The paper was bad, sure,
but mass movements against vaccines
don't start because of the release of a paper.
Like we discussed, people don't read papers.
I didn't read it for, like, 20 years,
and you know who else didn't read it?
Every journalist who reported on it,
but when a doctor publicly says
the government is putting millions of children at risk
with a vaccine rolled out nationwide,
even if his paper's a load of old shit,
you gotta report on that.
The possibility was too tantalizing to ignore.
It's really hard to get across how unavoidable
the issue was.
If you even glanced at a TV or a newspaper
in the mid-2000s,
it was MMR might cause autism
or it was Princess Diana is Still Dead.
Measles kills thousands of people every year,
but today, questions about the vaccine.
Vaccination could be linked to a new side effect,
a combination of bowel disease and autism.
Hundreds of articles, news pieces,
and documentaries were made
about the potential significance of this study.
They rarely show or discuss the contents
of the paper itself,
but the doctor behind it came out against MMR.
There's a potential link.
There's a potential link, everybody.
And do you know what happens when every news resource
is screaming about the potential risks of a vaccine?
You make millions of people terrified
to vaccinate their children.
I was growing up during the MMR scare,
and the main thing I remember from the TV news
at that time was big shots of pointy needles
and children screaming as they get given an injection
and ominous voiceovers saying,
oh, these vaccines might be dangerous.
It's almost like TV deliberately scares people
for ratings because that's how this works.
That's the entire point.
If you want to know why thousands of parents
think MMR gave their children autism,
it's not because they came to that conclusion on their own.
We've seen how before all of this reporting happened,
only a teeny tiny minority of parents
made the connection between autism and the vaccine.
They could only find seven parents of autistic children
who blamed MMR in the original study even.
The only thing that changed was how many news outlets
were telling everyone the vaccine might cause it.
After years of the media telling them
it could have been the jab,
some parents started to believe it.
The symptoms started to appear when he was two,
soon after he had his MMR.
This is the age at which autism usually develops,
but his parents don't believe it's coincidence.
His parents didn't believe it was a coincidence
because every news resource was telling them
it might have something to do with the vaccine,
and trusting that the media had done the work
and knew what they were talking about,
they believed what they were being told.
The end result of publications and broadcasts like this
was a lot of concerned parents,
a lot of unvaccinated children,
and a whole lot of new cases of measles.
With inoculation rates falling to dangerous levels.
In Ireland, the debate over MMR has been fueled
still further by a measles outbreak
which killed three children.
Whatever the official evidence,
which rejected a link between MMR and autism,
fewer parents were prepared to take a risk.
I wonder why that might be.
Could it be because every time you turned on the television,
there's footage of a screaming child
with a needle in its arm?
Once literally every other doctor had come out saying,
look, there's no proof. Please stop doing this,
a lot of journalists got really defensive suddenly
and started putting out pieces like,
no, I will not stop reporting scaremongering bullshit.
Wait, the same journalist wrote both of these.
She just spent like six months of her career
complaining about people criticizing her.
Amazing.
So what was Andrew Wakefield doing during all this?
Well, he was getting interviewed nonstop
and having clips played in almost all of these news pieces.
He was like a celebrity,
especially to the growing list of parents
newly convinced by the media's reporting
that he'd discovered why their children had autism.
For a couple of years, Andrew Wakefield
was the sort of guy who you filmed in slow motion
in black and white.
Holy shi-
Wakefield used his time in the spotlight
to spread even more doubt about MMR
and continue to repeat the recommendation
that parents get separate vaccines instead.
At the press conference, in interviews in the aftermath,
and four whole times on a 23-minute videotape
he sent to journalists,
he claims he thinks separate vaccines
would avoid the risk of autism.
Andrew Wakefield says he appealed
to the chief medical officer more than six months ago
to give worried parents the option of the single vaccine.
My recommendation has been
that children should continue to be vaccinated,
but to separate the vaccines,
there is sufficient anxiety in my own mind
over the safety, the long-term safety of the polyvalent,
that is the MMR vaccination in combination,
that I think that it should be suspended
in favor of the single vaccines.
There is sufficient anxiety in my own mind
that it would be sensible to divide them
into separate doses.
There is sufficient anxiety
that the parents must have a choice
of how they protect their children.
It's really kind of interesting
that while the modern anti-vaccine movement
insists that all vaccines are dangerous in some way,
the guy who started the fear and anxiety
that led to this was pro-vaccine.
We advocate vaccination.
This is not anti-vaccine in any way.
He was really specific about the fact
that he thought parents should keep vaccinating,
just that they should use alternatives to MMR.
The single vaccines are likely in this context
to be safer.
Remember that disease he speculated about
at the end of his paper?
That there might be some kind of bowel disorder
caused by MMR that then leads to autism?
This came up in the media a lot as well.
Could the NMR jab be causing a strange,
new kind of bowel disease
that was turning the children autistic?
Measles, mumps, and rubella given together
may be too much for the immune system
of some children to handle.
There is a bowel disease, a new syndrome
associated with regressive autism,
and that that may be related to MMR.
Eventually, he even came up with a name for it.
Autistic enterocolitis.
Wakefield's theory, when he tries to explain it,
is that the almost-dead measles virus
present in the MMR vaccine
can get stuck in the intestine...somehow,
causing all that inflammation
they apparently found in the study.
More on that later.
Which leads to it not digesting certain foods
like bread and milk properly,
turning them into, his words,
a morphine-like substance
which then leaks out of the bowel
and into the brain, causing autism.
Morphine-like substances from the gut
that you and I produce in our diet
from milk and wheat
are actually getting access through that leaky gut
into the developing brain.
This theory is, uh, very strange.
One of the many strange things about it
is that it specifically implicates
the measles part of the vaccine.
If measles, when it's in a vaccine,
can cause a syndrome that leads to autism,
how could you possibly be so certain
that the separate vaccine for measles would be safe?
The risk of this particular syndrome developing
is related to the combined vaccine,
the MMR, rather than the single vaccines.
Okay, sure, but why?
On what basis are you saying that, Andy?
How could a doctor so easily make that recommendation?
And it may be that giving the measles on its own
reduces the risk of this particular syndrome developing.
He just keeps saying it.
My opinion, again,
is that the monovalent, the single vaccines,
measles, mumps, and rubella,
are likely in this context to be safer
than the polyvalent vaccine.
That's the MMR vaccine.
There's actually a real reason
why he recommended the separate vaccine so much.
Uh, we'll get to that later.
Here's the one example I could find
of an interviewer asking him to explain themself.
But even supposing the measles element of the MMR vaccine
had deposited the virus in the intestinal tissue
of these children,
a single jab of measles might do the same.
Theoretically, it might.
But you're advocating a jab,
single jabs instead of MMR?
I said theoretically.
Oh, only theoretically.
Well, that's fine, then.
What a great scientist.
But if you say it may do,
then how can you advocate a single jab of measles,
even if there's only a theoretical possibility
that it might damage a child?
While that question mark exists,
at the very least,
parents deserve a choice of how they protect their children
against these infections,
whether it be with the MMR vaccine
or whether it is with the single vaccine.
He always finds a way to pivot back
to how in the midst of all of these questions and concerns,
which he started,
parents should at least have the option
of a separate vaccine.
Honestly, you'd think he was some kind of salesman
for alternative vaccines.
Autistic enterocolitis is not
and has never been accepted as real by gastroenterology,
the field specializing in the stomach and intestines,
but an ordinary person, or worse, a journalist,
might not understand it enough
to know that it doesn't make sense.
So, of course, it got reported as an interesting new idea.
It was a bold and controversial theory.
That's an interesting choice of words.
This piece by that really defensive lady,
Melanie Phillips, one of the most well-paid journalists
in Britain at the time, is still continuing to spread it
in this very article about being criticized for spreading it.
She calls it a unique gut-brain disease.
When you imagine a new disease,
of course it's gonna sound unique, Melanie.
No red flags popping up around the fact
that no disease has ever functioned like this before?
No? Fucking hell.
This completely unproved, unique, bold,
and controversial theory was irresistible to Phillips,
a bigot of the year award-winning writer
famous for also denying climate change,
calling Obama an Islamist,
describing a group of liberal Jews as Jews for genocide,
and opposing both Irish independence and gay rights,
which she dismissed as an attack on the traditional family
by cultural Marxism.
It's not shocking that Phillips was wrong about MMR.
It's her job to be wrong about everything.
The truly shocking thing about this is that for once,
the entire rest of the British media
were on the same side as her,
uncritically regurgitating everything Wakefield said
to millions of people.
This completely irresponsible reporting
caused fear, vaccine hesitancy,
kick-started an anti-vaccine movement
that's still here today,
and resulted in the deaths of children
from completely preventable diseases.
And that's the tea, sis.
There's real liquid in there. I'm not doing a bit.
I will spill it if I try and show it to you.
I'm sorry, but there's, look.
See? It's real.
It's not tea, though. It's coffee.
I'm not a farmer.
Perhaps the only thing more frustrating
than seeing the media do everything it can
to push pseudoscience
was how everyone actually addressed the topic of autism.
Autism is a complex condition
we still don't fully understand,
with many variations in symptoms and severity,
but the media never mentioned that.
They deliberately went looking for the most severe
and extreme cases they could find
and then filmed them to exploit for television.
Children who couldn't communicate verbally
or had severe physical disabilities as well.
The intent to make the MMR question
as serious as possible
resulted in an almost pornographic obsession
with suffering children.
They went out of their way to portray autism
as a horrific tragedy
that it's worth risking a disease to avoid.
And yeah, measles is a disease.
Like, it kills people.
It can cause incredibly severe complications
that are with people for life.
We as a society are no longer really aware
of just how dangerous measles can be
because we don't see all those complications
as much because of vaccinations.
Measles, mumps, and rubella are legitimately dangerous
and potentially life-threatening diseases,
and it says a lot about how we think about neurodivergence
that it's worth risking that
to avoid being autistic to some people.
Hell, I was in Waitrose a few months ago.
I never shop there, but I pretend to
so I can use their unnecessarily massive parking space,
and I saw them selling a magazine
with this on the cover.
Reignite your child's brain
with alternative treatments.
What they mean there is alternatives to treatment.
This is not how a healthy society
discusses its people.
Autistic people have to navigate a world
that refuses to accommodate them in the slightest
to the point they're regularly confronted
with the idea other people think their brain has gone out.
Come on, get it together, Waitrose.
You're the up-market, upper-class,
rich people supermarket.
You're supposed to be the smartest.
What's going on there?
The only thing that needs igniting here
is your fucking shops.
Did we get clearance to say that?
Okay, that was a joke?
While the MMR scale was at its height,
the entire media landscape was a unified front
in saying, wrongly,
that autism is the worst fate imaginable for a child
and much worse than dying of measles,
so a lot of kids didn't get vaccinated.
Then again, it wasn't all bad.
Some parents just vaccinated their children
for measles, mumps, and rubella separately,
which, by the way, was pretty expensive.
But they don't want their child to have MMR.
They'd rather pay for single vaccines
at 60 pounds a shot.
60 quid?
By jolly, governor!
Imagine millions of parents wanting
an expensive alternative vaccine
because all of a sudden a study had come out
saying that the regular one might cause autism
and a prominent scientist was cautioning against it.
He'd urged the government to split MMR
into separate vaccines.
Giving the measles on its own
reduces the risk of this particular syndrome developing.
Why, whoever was producing and selling
the alternative vaccine would be in for a fucking goldmine,
wouldn't they?
They'd make an absolute fortune.
Here's a funny thing about that.
Part four.
Andrew Wakefield is a lying conman
who wanted your money.
Oh, sorry. That puts me at risk of libel, doesn't it?
Hold on. Let's revise that.
Part four.
In my opinion, Andrew Wakefield is a lying conman
who wanted your money.
So we have Wakefield's paper
and the implication that MMR might cause autism in there
and you have Wakefield saying,
I ain't got several vaccines.
You and I can both agree
that there might be a conflict of interest there
if, if Wakefield was selling an alternative vaccine, right?
We can all agree that would be fucked up, wouldn't it?
Here's Wakefield's patent on an alternative measles vaccine.
This little piece of shit was filed six months
before the study was released.
So, uh, what's going on there, Andy?
Something you want to tell us, buddy?
It's time to introduce someone new to the story.
Brian Deer is an award-winning investigative reporter
with a long history of exposing medical fraud,
specializing in the pharmaceutical industry,
and the perfect sort of person
for the middle of this health scare.
Deer was one of the few journalists
who didn't simply accept what Wakefield
was saying at face value
and thought to dig a little deeper into the study
and what he was really up to.
Deer called the hospital Wakefield worked at
with some basic questions,
the kind that Wakefield apparently
wasn't used to getting.
Within three hours of doing so,
Wakefield's publicist, you know,
doctors hiring publicists to promote them.
That happens all the time,
had made a complaint about Deer
to the newspaper he worked at.
Deer, of course, only grew more interested.
His eventual 2004 documentary,
MMR What They Didn't Tell You,
is the better documentary I mentioned before,
and by better, I mean blew the doors
off of Andrew Wakefield's whole scheme.
It was Deer who discovered Wakefield's patent.
Let's take a look at that patent now.
The present invention relates to a new vaccine
for the prevention and or prophylaxis
against measles virus infection.
Now, I'm not a big-time science-talking fancy guy,
but this sounds a little bit like a measles vaccine.
The patent was submitted in June 1997,
so Wakefield had done most of the study
and then rushed to patent a method
of making a competing vaccine he could sell later.
And guess what? If you look closely at the patent,
you can see a familiar name on there next to Wakefield's.
Remember Hugh Fudenberg?
The quack who thought he could cure autism
after having his medical license revoked?
His name is also on the patent!
He's credited as a co-inventor of this vaccine!
Fudenberg's company,
the very real and legitimate-sounding
Neuro-Immunotherapeutics Research Foundation,
is listed on the patent along with a business address.
In the documentary where he revealed
the existence of this patent,
Brian Deer went to that address to try to find Fudenberg
and discovered the company had already shut down
and the building had become a real estate agency.
Looking that address up now, it appears to be a hairdresser's.
Doesn't look like one of America's
premier research foundations.
When he did find him, Deer asked Fudenberg
about the whole thought-he-could-cure-autism thing
and, uh, well, I, uh, ha, ha, ha.
Do you believe that autism can be cured?
Yes.
Cured? Yes.
It's cheap, it's oral, no injections.
One pill a day, every other day for three or six months.
And where, where does that come from?
From my bone marrow.
From your own personal bone marrow?
Yeah.
I mean, that's, that seems extraordinary.
Yeah.
♪♪
Just to quickly remind you, this man is the co-inventor
of Wakefield's alternative vaccine.
You know what? You got me.
Vaccines might be dangerous.
And just in case it wasn't extremely obvious
what a hasty fucking scam Wackyfield
and his one friend who agreed with him
were putting together,
Fudenberg's name is spelled wrong on the patent.
The other inventor of this vaccine
besides Andrew Jeremy Wakefield
is one Hugh Fundenberg.
Nice one, Jeremy.
By 1999, Wakefield was the director
of several medical businesses,
Immunospecifics Biotechnologies Limited
and Carmel Healthcare Limited,
named after his wife at the time.
She later divorced him.
He started shopping these companies around
for investors based on the very convenient patent
he'd got right before the health scare he caused.
But in addition to the vaccine,
Wakefield had another product in mind.
If autistic enterocolitis turned out to be real,
big if there, I know,
that would mean there would be a completely new market
in the form of testing for this new disease.
Wakefield planned on producing and selling
diagnostic kits meant to test for autistic enterocolitis.
A private and confidential prospectus
for potential investors acquired by Brian Deer claimed,
It is estimated that the initial market
for the diagnostic will be litigation-driven testing
of patients with AE, autistic enterocolitis,
from both the UK and the USA.
Describing the target audiences as,
Parent groups and lawyers
representing affected individuals.
And,
Major pharmaceutical companies.
These prospectuses also calculated
how much these businesses would be worth.
It is estimated that by year three,
income from this testing could be about
£3,300,000,
rising to about £28 million.
Adjusting for inflation,
that upper estimate is about $72 million.
If you think that's bad,
years earlier he estimated a much larger number
to the for-profit branch of the Royal Free Medical School.
£72.5 million per year.
Almost $200 million in today's money.
In an inventor school investor meeting document
that Deer obtained,
Wakefield teased they could charge
premium prices for the technology
he intended to develop.
Wakefield also became director of a third business,
Unigenetics Limited, in the Irish Republic.
Wakefield applied for and was successfully given
£800,000, more than $2 million today,
in government funding to begin developing the test.
And this is all on top of how much money
Wakefield would get if he managed to get the funding
to manufacture his alternative vaccine.
Companies like Axcan Pharma in Canada
were paying to fly him out to discuss his business plans.
According to Brian Deer,
he was also negotiating a consultancy
with Johnson & Johnson and developing connections
with both Merck and SmithKlineBeachum.
This guy was sure he was gonna be rolling in money.
I wonder if this might point to a financial incentive
to discredit MMR.
Hmmmmm...
Ah!
Watching Wakefield repeatedly push
for getting alternative vaccines just in case
is really chilling to watch now.
You have to watch him sit there and create demand
for his planned future products,
and no one watching knows what he's up to.
They think he's a doctor just asking questions about MMR.
No wonder he wasn't anti-vaccine.
He wanted you to buy his!
That said, there were a few roadblocks
to the success of these businesses.
The first is that autistic enterocolitis
is a fake disease he just made up,
which means it's very hard to invent a test for it.
In Ireland, at Unigenetics,
Wakefield brought in a colleague,
John O'Leary, to try to get the testing kits to work.
O'Leary claimed his test could find measles virus
in the bowels of autistic children.
He'd found measles virus in most of the samples
he'd tested from children with autism and bowel disease.
This is the closest Wakefield or any of his cohorts
would ever come to proving autistic enterocolitis exists,
but this quickly fell apart.
Every other lab that tried to recreate his results
found the same thing.
The only way his equipment could get the results
he was getting is if there was contamination
or if his machine had been calibrated wrong.
It turned out later it was both.
Test tubes that didn't have measles in them
tested positive for measles.
O'Leary had an 11.1% stake in Immunospecifics,
the company which would be selling the kits,
which would have made him incredibly rich
if the test had eventually worked,
but strangely he stopped being able to get these results
once people started scrutinizing his work.
So that's 800,000 pounds of taxpayer money
down the drain.
♪ ♪
The second problem was that potential investors
who looked into his alternative vaccine
even slightly would notice that the guy who co-invented it
was a doctor who had just been fired
and thought he could cure autism
using his fucking bone marrow!
So I guess what I'm saying is there was a slight delay
in finding people willing to fund it.
Finally, as Wakefield tried to launch his businesses,
there was a critical shake-up
at the hospital he was working at.
While many of the Royal Free Hospital's higher-ups
were fans of Wakefield's controversial paper
and the attention it brought to the hospital
and medical school, and some of them
were even involved directly with his new businesses,
in late 1999 the school got a new head of medicine
named Mark Pepys.
Pepys was a specialist in fields close to what Wakefield
was speculating about in his papers,
and like most scientists who knew anything
about the subject could tell something was up.
Wakefield was sent a letter voicing concerns
about the scientifically unjustified basis
of the work the companies were doing
along with the incredibly obvious
conflicts of interest happening here.
You know, you kind of have a vested interest
in proving a link between vaccines,
bowel disorders, and autism
when you intend to make millions of pounds off it.
Even then, they volunteered to support Wakefield more,
but not in the way he wanted.
Remember that thing I said about pilot studies?
I'm sure you do. You have a good memory.
I really respect that about you.
They offered to continue employing him,
but only if he undertook a new, much bigger study
to actually explore the original study's findings properly.
He was offered help with a study on 150 patients
to confirm what he had only really speculated about
so far with a study of 12.
Good scientific practice now demands that you and others
seek to confirm or refute robustly, reliably,
and above all, reproducibly,
the possible causal relationships
between MMR vaccination and autism,
autistic enterocolitis, and inflammatory bowel disease
that you have postulated.
Autistic enterocolitis is in quotes.
They don't believe him. It's great.
This would be any legitimate scientist's dream.
The freedom and support to fully explore a hypothesis
and discover the truth.
Wakefield agreed to perform the study,
but then he never actually did it.
Pepys would later go on to say Wakefield was
a wanker and a fraud.
Eventually, in 2001, after repeatedly ignoring calls
to do the study he'd agreed to do,
he was told to leave.
Check out this article all about...
Oh, I love journalism.
Last November, Andrew Wakefield
left the Royal Free Hospital by mutual agreement.
Capitalizing on his perceived reputation with the public
as a man who had discovered a link
between vaccines and autism, Wakefield said...
I have been asked to go
because my research results are unpopular.
This was meant to sound conspiratorial,
like, they let me go because I'm making MMR look bad,
but it seems like he was just unpopular with people
because they could tell he was a fraud and a wanker.
At this point, Wakefield's career
as far as real medicine was concerned
was over and his businesses failed to get off the ground
because he no longer had any legitimacy left.
What pharmaceutical company or other investor
is gonna give money to a doctor who just got fired
for refusing to prove the thing he's trying
to get funding for even exists?
In 2003, Deer's investigation was in a full swing
and beginning to uncover all of this.
He also made a really interesting discovery
about something that took place during the original study.
You know that whole autistic enterocolitis thing?
Both his theories about MMR's danger
and his new businesses making testing kits
for the disease rested on being able to find
the measles virus in the intestines
of children with autism.
The question we've been asking,
is measles virus present
in the intestine of these children?
The BBC documentary covered this search extensively
with Wakefield saying in an interview
that proving it was there would require
finding the RNA of the virus in tissue samples.
The gold standard now is to find
the gene of the virus in there.
The big deal here is if Wakefield can't find
the gene of the virus, then his theory is wrong.
In these interviews, Wakefield is trying to imply
that they've only just started looking for the virus,
so they haven't found it yet, but that's okay.
They've only just started looking, right?
This turned out to be a lie.
Deer discovered that Wakefield had already looked for it
and it's not there.
Dr. Nick Chadwick worked on Wakefield's paper
and was a specialist on methods
of finding measles RNA in tissue samples.
Wakefield actually helped co-author some of his work,
so of course, Wakefield had Chadwick look
for measles RNA in the tissue samples
taken from the children in the study.
These were the children Wakefield was sure
must have measles somewhere in their guts
since he was blaming their autism on it.
However, when he looked,
he never found any measles whatsoever.
Did you find measles virus in those children?
No.
No single case did I find any measles virus
in those children.
This means that Wakefield already knew
before he even published the paper
that measles couldn't be found
in the guts of autistic children.
Dr. Wakefield's theory was that it was measles virus itself
that was responsible for a bowel disease
and then leading on to some kinds of autism
and you found no measles virus.
That's correct.
The final published version of the 1998 study
doesn't have Dr. Chadwick's name on it
even though he did a lot of work for it.
Chadwick later wrote in a signed declaration
that he specifically asked for his name
to be left off the paper
because he wasn't comfortable with how Wakefield
was still pushing his theory
even though he'd found zero positive tests for measles.
By this point, he was already planning
to launch a business selling testing kits
based on this theory,
so he ignored the work in his own lab
that disproved him and kept saying
he thought measles could cause a bowel disease
that leads to autism
and kept looking there for measles
for years afterwards.
The BBC documentary is about his hunt
for the measles virus
because even four years after launching his paper,
he still hadn't found anything else
to back up what he was saying.
I actually have to give some credit now
to this BBC documentary.
Even though they mostly side with Wakefield
and assume he's going to find the proof soon,
there is one segment where the interviewer's like,
wait a second.
Shouldn't you have proved it
before you said it?
As I say, proof may be 10, 15 years away
in terms of definitive scientific proof.
So shouldn't you have waited?
No.
Obviously after discovering all this,
Brian Deer had even more questions for Wakefield,
which Wakefield was continuing to avoid.
I've been trying now to speak with him for a year.
We even wrote,
but he didn't reply.
Deer eventually just went to an autism conference
Wakefield was speaking at.
After his presentation,
Deer approached him with questions.
Dr. Wakefield, I'm sorry to interrupt.
Brian Deer, Channel 4 Television.
Um, could I talk to you about your research, sir,
and your, uh, commercial ambitions?
Excuse me.
There's something kind of cathartic
about just how guilty Wakefield acts here.
Like, he's happily hanging around after his talk,
casually answering questions from concerned parents
and other reporters,
and then the instant he recognizes Brian Deer,
the guy he's been actively avoiding for over a year,
he turns and leaves the room as fast as he can.
Wakefield's only defense
against his clear financial incentive
to discredit MMR is to run away
and hope you leave him alone,
and since Deer clearly wasn't doing that,
Wakefield decided to escalate.
A few months after this footage
of him heroically running away like a baby
from basic inquiry was broadcast,
Wacky Andy filed a defamation lawsuit
against Channel 4, who produced the documentary,
the Sunday Times, who published some of Deer's reporting,
and additionally, he sued Brian Deer's personal website,
briandeer.com.
Can you imagine being that petty?
In 2004, 10 of the paper's original 13 authors
came forward to publicly retract
the interpretation section of the paper.
Half a decade after its publication,
a vast majority of the people
who worked with Wakefield on his paper
have gone on record to say
they think his conclusions are bollocks.
At this point, Wakefield's study's coffin
has fallen through the floor
from the sheer weight of all the nails
that have been hammered in it.
So that's the foundational study
of the anti-vaccine movement.
A hack fraud's bullshit paper
claiming that a handful of parents
know better than all doctors
so he could sell an alternative competing vaccine
that he'd patented,
which he thought he was gonna make millions selling.
The evidence against the movement
can't get much worse than that, can it?
That was a joke.
Part five, it gets much worse.
Brian Deer didn't stop there.
Wakefield was trying to sue him to get him to stop digging,
and guess what?
One of the first rules of investigative reporting
is that if they try and sue you for finding things out,
you're probably onto something.
I mean, he brought me into the story
by virtue of the fact that years ago he sued me.
He discovered that two years before the paper
was published, Wakefield had been hired
by a lawyer to conduct the study.
The lawyer, Richard Barr,
had realized there was potentially millions
and millions of pounds in bringing
a class-action lawsuit against MMR manufacturers
on behalf of parents of autistic children,
but since there was no actual evidence
the vaccine did this,
he paid Wakefield to find some.
Wakefield charged Barr £150 an hour
for the time he spent working on the study,
eventually totaling over £435,000.
In today's money, that's more than $1.1 million.
This was more than eight times his yearly salary
at his job at the hospital.
Six months before the Lancet published the study,
Barr sent Wakefield a letter saying, and I quote,
actually, I got Sean to say it.
I have mentioned to you before
that the prime objective is to produce
unassailable evidence in court
so as to convince a court
that these vaccines are dangerous.
Oh, okay.
This whole thing was bullshit, wasn't it?
And hey, remember Jabs?
Jabs was involved with the lawsuit,
and it turned out their members helped to recruit
many of the parents to the study in the first place.
I swear to God, this isn't one of the joke logos we made.
This is actually the header on their Facebook page.
This low-resolution, shitty nightmare.
Jackie Fletcher, the founder of Jabs,
was also a litigant in the lawsuit.
They needed her connections to the dozen or so other parents
who actually blamed MMR to be able to do all of this.
Some of the parents were even involved
with the lawsuit too.
It's kind of clever if you think about it.
A couple of parents blamed vaccines
for their child's autism and wanted to sue its manufacturer,
but there was no evidence it wasn't just a coincidence,
so they told their opinions to a doctor
their lawyer had hired who would then report
those opinions in a paper,
and now in court you can say there's scientific evidence
implying a link between vaccines and autism
even though the link is just those opinions from before.
There's probably a word for this trick.
Idea laundering? I don't know.
Not all of the parents knew the study was being done
to help a lawsuit,
but they were all chosen deliberately.
However, like we explored earlier,
not many parents in 1996 blamed vaccines for autism,
so they had to cast a wide net to even find
the couple of parents they did.
Child 11 wasn't even from England.
He was from California.
If a contact of Jabs or Richard Barr
thought you might suspect vaccines
made your child autistic,
you and your child were being flown around the world
to take part in this study,
and even then some of the parents still turned out
not to blame the vaccine.
I cannot stress enough what a fucking shambles
this paper was.
Most of the other doctors working on the study
had no idea the guy running it had been paid
hundreds of thousands of pounds to discredit MMR.
According to Chadwick's later testimony,
Wakefield worked separately with each individual scientist
instead of bringing them all together,
which would have been the normal thing to do.
This afforded Wakefield a good level of secrecy
about his motives.
The other scientists must have largely thought
they really were looking into a connection
between autism and bowel disorders in children,
so even the doctors and scientists involved
were being lied to and tricked
into lending their time and effort
to a study being done to help a lawsuit
make some lawyers a lot of money.
Once all of this came out,
Wakefield was, medically speaking, fucked.
While he'd been asked to leave his post years earlier,
he still had a license to practice medicine in the UK,
but amidst all of these discoveries,
the General Medical Council began a fitness-to-practice
hearing against Wakefield,
going through the records of the study
to evaluate whether his behavior had been ethical.
The row he started dominated the headlines.
Now his conduct, not his views,
will be making the news.
This hearing would go on to last for 217 days,
making it the longest in General Medical Council history
and longer than the O.J. Simpson trial.
This is Wakefield's only legitimate achievement.
He made such a fucking mess,
it took that long to pick through it all.
Meanwhile, remember when Wakefield sued Brian Deer?
This would turn out to be the worst mistake
he ever made in his life.
Because Wakefield's libel case
was related to accusations of what he did during a study,
that meant that the records of what happened in the study
were evidence in the case now.
I mean, how else were they gonna prove it was libel or not?
The judge agreed that Deer had to be granted access
to the confidential, unredacted medical records
of the children from the study.
By trying to sue a journalist into shutting up,
Wakefield had accidentally given him permission
to see everything.
Deer recalls being sat in a room with his lawyer,
reading the medical records of the children
and other records of what happened in the study
while Wakefield's legal team were rushing
to get a cab to take them to the courthouse
so they could drop the suit and stop him reading it
as fast as they could.
Deer got home that night to a call from his lawyer
saying the case—new firmware available?
Thanks, Windows!
Deer got home that night to a call from his lawyer
telling him the case was over,
and as a fun bonus,
because of how lawsuits work in the UK,
Wakefield had to pay Deer's legal costs,
the check for which Deer keeps proudly displayed
on his website, but Deer wasn't done yet.
Wakefield had just dropped a lawsuit
to stop him finding things out.
But in the context of that lawsuit,
a great deal of information was disclosed to me
by Wakefield's lawyers,
and it was quite clear I had to continue.
Deer continued his research and also attended
many of the GMC's hearings about Wakefield's conduct
which discussed many of the same records
he just dropped a lawsuit to hide,
and based on all of this, he put the pieces together
and figured out exactly what happened during the study.
The result of his work is an absolutely incredible series
of articles first published in the British Medical Journal.
♪♪
There's another fucking firmware!
Why is there so much firmware?
Deer figured out who some of the previously
anonymous parents of the children in the study were
and showed some of them what the study said
about their children, and it turned out
the paper was lying.
For example, he showed the medical records
to the father of child 11.
And he looked at the paper, and he just looked
at what it said about his own child,
and he said, that's not true.
And that was, uh, one of the parents
of one of these children in the paper.
In a correspondence with Deer, he literally wrote...
The Lancet article indicates that autistic symptoms
started 15 months, a week after the MMR,
which is completely inaccurate.
My son's autistic behavior started 2 1⁄2 to 3 months
after the MMR, which was administered to him
at 15 months.
The bottom line is, if my son is indeed patient 11,
then the Lancet article made a false assertion
that his symptoms set in immediately after the MMR,
in service of some attorney's efforts to prove causation
that, unbeknownst to me, apparently drove this research.
He told Deer Wakefield had said his son
was the 13th child they'd looked at
and wasn't included in the paper,
and that's why none of the information in the study
seemed to describe his son.
According to Brian Deer, Wakefield had rewritten
his son's medical history and lied to him to cover it up.
And this wasn't the only parent who had their story
changed by Wakefield.
You see, for the study to be useful in Barr's lawsuit,
they needed to establish a temporal link
with the vaccine.
Since this is the age autism usually develops,
they needed it to be within 14 days
and, if possible, even closer.
I mean, otherwise, it might seem like it was just
a coincidence, which it is, but like child 11,
the onset of autism wasn't convenient enough
in almost any of the other children.
The table suggests that eight of the 12 children's parents
claimed the symptoms happened within 14 days,
but according to Brian Deer's reporting
from the medical council hearings,
many of the parents never said this,
and most of the children's medical records
put their symptoms starting way after this time period
with some of them showing symptoms
of what could have been autism before they were vaccinated.
Almost every child's autistic symptoms
either started way too late to be useful in the lawsuit
or way too soon.
Wakefield just lied and changed the times
and allegations of the parents around
until the paper said what he needed it to say.
This is the thing that makes so much of what he said
during the scare really fucking infuriating.
Like, he would constantly bring up
how he was just listening to the parents
and reporting what they were saying.
We believe.
We trust in the parents' story.
If you think there was a problem with my shitty study,
you're calling all of those parents liars.
How dare you?
When they say to you,
I believe my child regressed after the MMR vaccine,
do you take that seriously or not?
Damn right you do.
Damn right you do.
He got all high and mighty about how you need
to believe the parents when he had made up
most of what the parents had said
and the media fucking ate it up too.
Andrew Wakefield is one of the few doctors
to listen to parents who believe their children
were damaged by MMR.
He's the only doctor who listens to the lies
that he wrote for a lawsuit he was being paid to help with.
Fucking hell.
Remember that new syndrome Wakefield came up with?
Now we know why he did that.
To pursue a class action lawsuit
against the vaccine's manufacturers
and convince a court of the vaccine's danger,
to quote a judge, Barr needed it to cause
a distinct and specific clinical syndrome.
If all the kids just had random bowel disorders,
there wouldn't be a clear enough link to the vaccine,
but if they all had a fancy new disease,
he could argue they were all caused by the same thing.
Wakefield invented autistic enterocolitis,
which he repeatedly called a genuinely new syndrome
in the media so the lawsuit could justify itself.
Of course, to do this,
all the children's bowel disorders
would have to actually look similar enough
that they could reasonably be called the same thing.
The paper listed 11 of the 12 children
having some form of nonspecific colitis,
creating the illusion that they all had a similar disorder.
According to the actual medical records,
only three of them had any major inflammation whatsoever.
The study had a pathologist on board
to determine what sort of bowel diseases the children had.
When she and her team ruled out colitis
in over half of the children,
which would obviously have been bad for the lawsuit,
Wakefield brought in a second pathologist
who had worked with him before to run the tests again.
When the second pathologist didn't even make mention
of colitis in his reports,
Wakefield ignored both of them and just wrote in the paper
that 11 of the 12 children had similar nonspecific colitis.
Wakefield went over the heads of everyone on his team
who didn't find any colitis and decided by himself
that all the children had a special new gut disorder
that causes autism.
What the fuck?
But that's not all.
You know how most of the children in the study
were diagnosed with a form of autism
and how, like, that's the entire point
that most of them had autism?
Like, that's the whole thing?
Well, it turns out that some of the children
reported as autistic in the study
didn't even have autism.
♪♪
Child seven was never diagnosed with autism
before, during, or after this study.
He was referred to the study because child six,
his brother, was diagnosed with autism.
Wakefield reported that this child was also autistic
and started showing signs of autism
24 hours after being vaccinated.
I mean, why not if you're just making shit up, right?
Child 12 had also never been given an autism diagnosis.
The developmental specialist who diagnosed them
said they had an impairment in respective language
but did not diagnose them with autism.
Wakefield, who, just to remind you,
is a gut surgeon with no psychiatric expertise
whatsoever, decided this was enough for him
to say they were autistic
and since their parents didn't blame the vaccine,
he said loss of speech development
and deterioration in language skills
noted at 16 months and made sure to mention
the child had MMR at 15 months
just so you know it started soon after the vaccine
even though the parents didn't blame it.
Oh, and while he was there, he diagnosed them
with chronic nonspecific colitis too.
You can see why Wakefield dropped his lawsuit
as fast as he could when Deer got permission
to read these, right?
This is likely why he never did
the larger study when he was asked to.
Once this fraudulent paper was out,
all the extra attention and scrutiny he gained
would have made it impossible to lie
and get away with it again.
To this day, no attempt to recreate
Wakefield's findings has ever succeeded.
The paper that started the obsession
with the connection between autism and vaccines
was a total fraud crafted by a lawyer
and the opportunistic doctor who he bought
and in the last 20 years,
data from millions and millions of children
all over the world indicates no link whatsoever.
The only paper that came close to showing that link
is a study so full of lies that even before it was out,
scientists who worked on it were asking
to have their names taken off.
The paper wasn't just badly made.
It wasn't just questionable.
It wasn't bold and controversial.
It was a lie for money,
but the worst thing about this study
was that somehow even that wasn't the worst thing.
["Wakefield"]
["Wakefield"]
["Wakefield"]
Hey, folks, the next section deals
with some pretty heavy stuff,
so if you're not into stories of child abuse,
uh, skip to the next chapter.
["Wakefield"]
As we've already explored,
Wakefield was trying to discover a new disease
linking autism and bowel disorders,
so during the study, he did everything he could
to find that link.
For this reason, each child underwent
a rough battery of invasive procedures.
The children spent a full week at the hospital,
during which they were frequently sedated,
given laxatives, had blood samples taken,
and then they were given colonoscopies,
lumbar punctures where a needle is inserted
between the bones of your spine to extract fluid,
MRI scans, again under sedation,
electroencephalograms where wires and electrodes
are run to the patient's head,
and a variety of other uncomfortable procedures.
A doctor once described this list of tests
as a lot even for adults to go through,
never mind autistic children.
Now, there's this thing in medicine
called informed consent.
Doctors can't just do invasive procedures on people.
You have to inform the patient
of the potential risks and dangers,
and you can only move forward with their approval.
In this study, the children were very young,
and some of them, emphasis on some, were autistic.
This meant the children's parents
had to give informed consent for them.
Andrew Wakefield wrote a handout to parents
to go with the consent form,
describing the procedures and their potential risks.
SurCare, a human rights organization,
acquired a copy of this handout,
and while the form does mention
almost every procedure Wakefield intended to do,
it doesn't mention any of the risks associated with them.
I'm serious.
The word risk is literally
not written anywhere on the form.
So let's talk about the risks of some of these procedures.
For those of you who don't know,
a colonoscopy is when a large tube
with a camera in it is inserted through your rectum
all the way up into your guts.
Normally, this is an important
and safe diagnostic procedure.
It's the most accurate test for rectal and colon cancer,
and this saves a lot of lives.
Sorry, I'm gonna take a moment and turn this video
into a public service announcement for colonoscopies.
Um, get one.
I'm being serious.
If you're an adult, especially over the age of 45,
and you've never had a colonoscopy,
please seriously consider getting one.
I've lost an uncle and a close friend
to bowel cancer at shockingly young ages.
It's a really common cause of death,
and if they catch it early, it's treatable.
Colonoscopies are perfectly safe
and often life-saving procedures,
but in children whose intestines are smaller
and weaker and harder to maneuver in,
there are risks of serious complications.
The scope can puncture the intestine,
which causes bacteria from the gut to leak out
and cause infection and other serious internal damage.
Risks of complications are significantly higher
for children five years or younger.
We try to be very careful to come around corners.
And these risks are genuine.
As part of the attempts to find more evidence later
and follow up on the original 1998 study,
a five-year-old autistic boy was given a colonoscopy
that went exceedingly wrong
and was left fighting for his life
with multiple organ failure after his bowel
was perforated in 12 places during the procedure.
There was no medical reason this child needed this procedure.
He was just being used as a guinea pig
to find any proof they could
that autistic enterocolitis was real.
The Royal Free had to pay almost £500,000,
roughly a million dollars today,
in damages to the boy and his parents
for causing lifelong disabilities
that required full-time care.
His parents reported that when they gave consent,
they had not been told of the risks.
If this is true, what happened here is an assault.
They almost killed this child,
and in the 1998 study,
they inflicted this procedure
on children as young as three.
Wakefield's consent form insists
that these procedures are usually tolerated well
by children and that it is entirely painless.
It gives zero mention of the very real risks
of inserting several feet of a scope into a child.
It even says,
if your child becomes distressed
or the procedure proves too difficult,
it will be performed under general anesthetic.
The form doesn't mention the risks
of this anesthetic either.
This normal consent form for a colonoscopy
makes incredibly clear that there are risks
of perforation and bleeding
and the possible adverse reactions
to being sedated too.
In case you're watching, Andy,
this is what informed consent looks like,
you piece of shi-
Wakefield needed these parents
to consent to these procedures.
His paycheck was resting on finding something
in the bowels of these children
that could possibly point to the disease
he was trying to invent,
so he wrote a handout that conveniently
didn't mention how risky some of these procedures
actually were.
And from other accounts given to Deer
about what happened during the study,
the children's experiences were far
from safe and painless.
Nurses were leaving and saying they didn't like
what was being done to these children.
Junior doctors were unhappy.
It needed three people to hold these kids down
in some cases just to have blood taken.
These are difficult children to explain
to what is going on.
I feel very sorry for the children
who I feel were being abused.
Children were fainting and vomiting
and trying to resist the testing.
They had to be force-fed some of the fluids
required for the tests.
They couldn't give one child their lumbar puncture
because he was uncontrollably vomiting
from all the other procedures that had been done on him
and it was sent home.
Another child's lumbar puncture
went so badly that he had to be rushed
to a different hospital for treatment.
If you do stuff like this to kids in your study
for no clinically justified reason,
that's child abuse!
Wakefield treated the children
as if they had genuine bowel conditions.
To that end, almost all of them
were given anti-inflammatory drugs
for the disorders he'd made up for them.
These medications often have an increased risk to children,
particularly under the age of six.
The risks of adverse events
includes life-threatening complications
including increased bleeding,
increased risk of infections,
and other severe side effects.
Some of these kids had problems communicating,
which would make reporting any side effects
they were experiencing very difficult,
further increasing the risk of severe problems
if something went wrong.
Considering that barely any of these children
actually had bowel disorders,
Wakefield was essentially putting children
at risk of the side effects of these drugs
for no reason while he looked for proof
of the disease he was trying to invent
to make a lawsuit look good.
The Medical Council also discovered
that during the study,
Wakefield gave an experimental drug
to one of the children without waiting for approval
from an ethics committee.
The drug was called
Dialysable Lymphocyte Extract Transfer Factor.
Wait a second.
The paper is a pilot study
on the effects of a substance called
Dialysable Lymphocyte Extract on children with autism.
Did Wakefield test one of Fudenberg's
autism-curing drugs on one of the children in his study?
What the fuck?
Thanks, Andy.
I'm sure whatever you gave those kids
was perfectly safe.
I mean, if this genius was behind it.
Where does that come from?
My bone marrow.
To convince the child's father to agree
to let him administer this drug to his child,
Wakefield offered him a job as managing director
of a company making and selling the drug.
Um, okay, my producer told me I can't say that.
There's no way of proving that happened
behind closed doors, so just to clarify,
we don't have evidence that Wakefield
offered a man a job to give his son a drug.
It might just be a coincidence
that the father became managing director
of a company that would profit
from selling the drug if it worked.
Maybe he just happened to have equity
in the company that would be making the drug
that was experimentally given to his child.
We will never know for sure how that happened.
Ahem.
Let's just walk through that again.
Andrew Wakefield might have offered a cushy job
to a guy to let him experiment on his kid
with a drug that he probably got from a guy
who got fired for stealing medical supplies,
wasn't a doctor anymore,
and thought he could cure autism
using his bone marrow.
The aristocrats.
On top of all of this, during the investigation,
the medical council found out that during one
of his own children's birthday parties,
Andrew Jeremy Wakefield lined up
all the other kids at the party
and offered them money for their blood.
I have to try and explain this.
In order to find any potentially useful evidence
for his study for the lawsuit,
he needed the blood of non-autistic children
so he could compare it and see what he could find,
but to get the blood, instead of, like,
putting in a request for non-autistic children's blood
or, like, calling for volunteers to come to the hospital
and give their blood and without running it past
an ethics committee, he offered his children's friends
£5 for their blood.
Ha ha ha!
And no, that's not, like, an allegation
that someone might have made up.
Wakefield told people that story at a conference in 1999.
At the hearing, he claimed to have made up
the part about throwing up and fainting
for dramatic effect.
His best defense of his extremely unethical
and weird behavior was that he made some of it up.
Shockingly, telling the ethics committee
that he was a fucking liar didn't help his case.
Speaking later in an interview,
Wakefield defended the birthday party child blood bribes,
saying it was all totally fine.
The only problem was that it did not have an approval
from the hospital ethics committee.
That does not make it unethical.
He's trying to well, actually, a fucking ethics board.
After reviewing all of this, in 2010,
the longest inquiry in general medical counsel history
concluded that Andrew Wakefield had failed
in his duties as a doctor,
acted against the interests of his patients,
and was, you know, a lying con man.
Sorry, that one was me.
And he was struck off the medical register,
making him no longer able to practice medicine
and officially not a doctor,
so whenever someone calls him a doctor in videos now,
they're making a mistake.
Look, I don't want to single this guy out,
but you shouldn't put doctor in his name.
He's not a doctor now.
Even in the documentary he made about himself in 2016,
he can't put doctor in front of his name.
He has to put MBBS.
Well, we know he's at least one kind of BS
if you know what I'm saying.
To quote the counsel's charges,
he showed callous disregard for any distress or pain
the children might suffer.
That same year,
the Lancet finally formally retracted the original study.
According to the Lancet's editor, Richard Horton,
it was utterly clear without any ambiguity at all
the statements in the paper were utterly false.
Well done, Richard.
Here's a round of applause for you.
Better too late than never, I guess.
That's not really an expression, is it?
The conclusion of the inquiry is protested
by Wakefield's remaining supporters.
We're with Wakefield!
We're with Wakefield!
While a news crew attempts to interview one of his critics,
one of his supporters attempts to shout him down
and make sure he can't say anything,
while another off-screen holds up a book
insisting it is they who are being silenced.
The irony is apparently lost on them.
Wakefield appeared before his flock
to say this was all completely unjust.
And I invite anyone to examine
the contents of these proceedings
and come to their own conclusions.
I think we just did, buddy.
Wakefield did lose a lot of his popularity
when the extent of his abuse and fraud was made known,
but he still had a few dedicated fans.
Often the parents of autistic children
who'd followed him so far
that they refused to accept what he did.
To Wakefield, these desperate people
are the perfect market.
I suspect the main reason he turned up
in the last few days of his hearing
was to advertise the book he'd written
all about it on national TV.
The book alleges that the Medical Council hearings
are just trying to crush him to protect vaccines.
He titled the book,
after one of the council's comments about him.
It's trying to be an ironic reference.
Like, he's accusing mainstream medicine
of callously disregarding the victims of MMR,
but I don't think he considered the implications
of quoting a doctor pointing out he abused children
on the cover of a book with a big picture
of his face on it.
It's a real if I did it situation.
Also in the dedication,
he thanks his long-suffering wife
who's with him here on the cover.
She's not his wife anymore though.
I guess she suffered enough
and like separate vaccines before it,
Wakefield made sure to recommend his book
in every interview he got.
These numbers, the dates were all fabricated
to sort of make a case.
Dr. Gupta, please, I urge you,
go and read my book.
You will understand it. Many people don't.
It's very funny watching him try to sell his merchandise
now that everyone knows he's a fraud.
If you read my book, you will be able to read the truth.
And has the BMJ read my book?
Have the doctors who apparently looked at all the records
read my book? No, because the truth is in that book.
Sir, I've read Brian Deer's report,
which is incredibly extensive.
Sir, I'm not here to let you pitch your book.
I'm here to have you answer questions.
If you read the record that I have set out in the book,
you will see the truth.
But sir, if you're lying, then your book is also a lie.
Wakefield's defense against Brian Deer's allegations,
now that suing him to shut him up has failed disastrously,
is to say Deer is a hit man
paid by vaccine manufacturers to ruin his career.
He is a hit man.
He's been brought in to take me down
because they are very, very concerned
about the adverse reactions to vaccines
that are occurring in children.
Wait a minute, sir. Let me just stop you right there.
You say he's a hit man and he's been brought in by they.
Who is they? Who is he a hit man for?
This is an independent journalist
who's won many awards.
Yeah, he's, uh, and he's, you know,
who brought this man in?
Who is paying this man? I don't know.
Who is behind Brian Deer's reporting?
Follow the money.
Also, buy my book, please.
Wakefield went on to claim later in the interview
that you're being paid by the Association
of British Pharmaceutical Industries.
Are you?
No, I'm not.
In 2011, New York Times Magazine staff writer
Susan Dominus caught up with Wakefield.
Though Wakefield presents himself to her
as someone whose career was destroyed
for going against the dogma that vaccines are safe,
Dominus is careful to point out that he does this
while signing copies of his book
for an enormous line of loyal followers,
one of whom is a tearful mother who blames herself
for not preventing her child's autism.
At the time the article was written,
Wakefield lived in a beautiful house
in a reclusive and expensive neighborhood
in Austin, Texas,
surrounded by many acres of hills and forest.
You can almost believe you're in Tuscany,
he says of the view from his back deck.
The book made him a decent amount of money,
as have his many paid speaking engagements
at anti-vaccine conferences where he's lauded
as the celebrity who got the movement started.
There's the hundreds of thousands of pounds
he got paid to do the study, of course,
and the multiple documentaries about him and his life
can't have been too shabby for him.
It's genuinely shocking how obviously
he's just grifting anti-vaccine people
for as much money as he can.
His 2016 film, Vaxxed,
is available at a discount on his website
if you buy it in a pack of ten.
Give a copy to your local legislators,
educators, and medical professionals.
Wakefield wants his followers to pay him
to do advertising for him.
When I look back at footage of the last day
of Wakefield's hearing,
I'm inevitably looking back at myself ten years ago
when I saw the same footage live on TV.
At the time, I saw these people as Wakefield's defenders,
but in a way, they were also his victims.
For a decade now, since I was a teenager,
I've been thinking about this woman
with the sign saying,
don't stifle uncomfortable science.
I remember I first noticed her
because I saw her and thought,
wait, is she wearing a Playboy scarf?
Surely the most uncomfortable thing
for these people here must be the possibility
the man they're here to defend has lied to them for money.
For someone who'd sided with Wakefield
during the scare, accepting that he had lied
would mean taking on some of the guilt
for helping to spread it.
One of the worst things about Wakefield's actions
is he's made these people complicit.
Maybe Wakefield actually cares about these people.
Maybe not, but either way,
their money spends just the same.
I wonder how many of these people bought his books
or his documentaries.
I wonder if any of them stop and think
about how they've made him rich.
Some of these people are extremely vulnerable,
parents of children with disabilities,
some of which require full-time care,
who fell for Wakefield because he was offering them
an explanation for why these things happen.
It brings me no joy to tell you
they paid for this view.
We're with Wakefield!
We're with Wakefield!
We're with Wakefield!
We're with Wakefield!
♪♪
At the end of all this,
I ask the eternal question
asked of every major fraudster in history.
How could someone do all this?
Cause all this fear and doubt
that has led to real, tangible harm
against your fellow human beings?
Why would someone do that?
Uh, money, thank you for watching.
-♪♪
-♪♪
-♪♪
There's probably a lot of people you could blame
for anti-vaccine beliefs getting as far as they have.
The anxieties people have right now
didn't come from nowhere.
Wakefield's legacy is built into the very DNA
of modern vaccine hesitancy.
Or the RNA, am I right?
Nice one, Kat. It's very clever.
Whenever you try to trace a trend of skepticism
about vaccines far enough,
it almost always leads back to the fear and anxiety
that started in 1998 and the men behind it.
Take, for example, Bill Maher.
Maher is a proponent of the possible link
between vaccines and autism
and frequently has anti-vaccine activists on his show.
Granted, he also has people on who think that's ridiculous,
so that's kind of like being fair and balanced.
His general stance is that vaccines can be good,
but he doesn't really go for them
because he's got a better idea.
I am not a germ theory denier.
I understand that germs and viruses cause diseases.
I may have been a little cocky about it
because I discovered from first-hand experience
that I could stave them off better with proper nutrition.
If your child dies of measles,
it's because he didn't eat his vegetables.
Bubonic plague!
Skip a trip to McDonald's, sheeple!
Throughout the years, Bill has repeated over and over
his distrust of vaccines
and the possible side effects they might pose.
I've tried to find an example of him citing a source
or giving some kind of data,
but no, it's always this general sense
that people think something might be wrong.
There's all these parents who say,
I had a normal child, got the vaccine.
This story keeps coming up.
Lots of parents are saying stuff,
and that's basically evidence,
and of course there's the old standout,
lots of people feel like me.
I was attacked for saying we should look into this
and I don't believe in it
and lots of people feel the same way.
I've heard a lot of stuff about feelings
being more important than facts,
so this is basically science, right?
Bill, you having us on the show
and rehashing all these problems
you got yourself into on your last show,
it's like going on a date and talking about your ex-wife.
Yeah!
Yeah!
If an intellectual titan like Bill Maher
thinks vaccines might be dangerous,
he must believe it for a good reason.
I did a lot of digging on this,
and I found a time when he made
a concrete scientific claim about vaccines.
In 2005, he was interviewed on Larry King Live.
This isn't footage of that interview.
I couldn't find footage of this one,
but there is a transcript on the CNN website.
During this interview, they discuss the flu shot,
which King had been taking for 25 years.
Maher tells him the best defense against disease
is to have a strong immune system.
I guess that's where the proper nutrition comes in
and says that the flu shot is actually bad
for your immune system.
He cites a strong distrust
of what he calls Western medicine,
which is a bit of a Eurocentric misnomer.
A lot of non-Western countries develop vaccines
and other modern medicine, you know.
Whatever. He doesn't care.
The conversation then turns to the avian flu,
which was a real concern at the time.
Bill states that he's not worried about bird flu
and gives a fascinatingly vague list of reasons why.
First of all, it's not going to happen,
which was a very clever insight
right up until something like that really did happen.
Uh, that's why people were worried about it, Bill.
Second of all, the fact it is mutating
shows that if you did come up with a vaccine tomorrow,
it wouldn't be effective against the disease
when the disease comes because the disease
is always morphing and mutating.
Bill is such a good public speaker.
The fact that vaccines actually help stop
the disease from spreading
and therefore developing those mutations
in the first place is lost on him.
Well, it was, but he got vaccinated for COVID-19,
so clearly he sees the value now.
This is attached to an announcement
that he got the virus,
so this week's show has to be canceled.
Apparently, he's asymptomatic and feels fine,
so I guess vaccines are pretty good, aren't they?
Considering how at-risk unvaccinated 65-year-olds
are for this virus,
I'm really glad he got vaccinated for his sake,
but they should probably just cancel his show completely.
I mean, we don't want to risk losing a national treasure.
The reality is a lot of pseudo-libertarian skepticism
about Western medicine instantly falls apart
the second it has to interact with reality
where people really do die of diseases.
For example, the man he is speaking to,
Larry King, passed away this year
of complications from COVID-19.
Anyway, Ma tells King that vaccines
are just a trick to get money.
It's just a way to funnel money
into the pharmaceutical companies.
Follow the money.
You'll find out where the bird flu is.
If bird flu had got bad enough,
you can guarantee Ma would have paid
top dollar for the vaccine.
Anyway, the discussion goes downhill
even further for Ma when King points out
that vaccines are great and polio was virtually eradicated
thanks to vaccination.
Bill gives this beautiful reply.
Yes, but, you know,
there are many books out that will...
that will...
and I'm not well enough versed on it to talk about it
that will indicate that there are other reasons
why it was.
And a lot of diseases that have been, they say,
whoa, this was eliminated because of a vaccine,
they find out, well, no, actually,
the country got toilets and that's what happened.
I think Bill really does a good job of summing up
a lot of people's beliefs about vaccination here.
Ma thinks it's smart to be skeptical about vaccines
right up until there's consequences
for himself, of course,
but his explanations are all unfounded
and unscientific.
The best he can say is there's probably books out there
that prove he's right, maybe,
but he's not read them.
This isn't skepticism.
This is ignorance trying to sound like skepticism.
To bring it all full circle,
it seems like Bill's beliefs about vaccines
are really based on that big scare
that started in the late 90s.
After all, the only factoid he seems to ever be able
to remember is that lots of parents said
they were bad that one time,
and that's not even a fact.
That's some opinions he remembers.
I'd joke that it's a pity they don't make a vaccine
for confirmation bias,
but he wouldn't have got it, would he?
There is, however, one time in this old interview
where he really does attempt to make a scientific claim.
He tells Larry that if you get the flu shot
more than five years in a row,
it tenfold increases the risk of getting Alzheimer's.
Hmm, that's a really specific thing to say.
Maybe by checking this claim out,
we can figure out who he's getting his beliefs from.
I looked, and there are actually studies
on the impact of vaccination on rates of Alzheimer's.
Um, the risk of Alzheimer's goes down.
Okay, so this clearly isn't his source.
I did some more digging, though,
and I found that in 1997 at a vaccine conference,
in one guy's presentation,
he said that a scientist had found that this happens.
There's no study cited here,
but that's at least a source for Bill's claims.
Let's check the doctor's papers
and see if we can find out for ourselves.
Wait a second. I blurred the scientist's name out
by accident. Let me fix that.
Dr. Hugh Fudenberg?
Wahahahaha!
No matter how you look at it,
a vast, vast majority of anti-vaccine rhetoric
and pseudoscience can be traced directly back
to these two guys.
According to a survey of U.S. health care professionals
in 2016, 77% of parents refusing vaccination
for their children still cite a fear of a link with autism.
When people refuse medicine for their children,
they largely point to the hazy memory
of the scare Wakefield started for money.
So yeah, it's pretty important to point out
they both lost their medical licenses
and their science was garbage,
and despite being an obvious hack, fraud, con man,
Wakefield is still embraced by the anti-vaccine community.
Wakefield was a guest of honor at Conspiracy,
the week-long cruise for all kinds of conspiracy theorists
where believers of all stripes gather to share their theories
about climate change, the Earth being flat,
time travelers, and horses being real.
The kind of funny thing is Wakefield himself
seems pretty embarrassed by this.
A skeptic who went on the cruise noted how unhappy he looked
with the implication of being a hero to a community
that absolutely loves complete quacks.
The story of my life is basically how to take
a perfectly good career and flush it down the toilet.
Luckily for Wakefield, the toilet is full of money,
and all he has to do to get it is lean further
and further away from science and deeper into this culture.
He's had to pivot to saying all vaccines are dangerous
because his new anti-vaccine audience
aren't very receptive to the old claim
that I'm not anti-vaccine, just one vaccine is dangerous,
and I recommend mine instead.
I don't think these people would buy a 10-pack of that story.
And of course, in the middle of the pandemic
that is currently happening,
Wakefield emerged from his mansion to remind everyone
that a virus that has so far killed over three million people
is better than being vaccinated against it.
As Nelson Mandela said at his trial,
there are ideals worth dying for.
Presumably of COVID-19.
I don't want to get too dramatic,
but better to die as a free man than live as a slave!
I don't think that was too dramatic, do you?
The fact the movement he started is still based
almost completely on his lies is pretty important to point out,
and in fact, it's useful to point it out
because despite how it might look,
the truth can be a powerful thing.
Once Wakefield got chased out to America
and had his medical license taken away,
vaccination rates in the UK recovered.
I love this because you can basically see
the effects of Brian Deer's reporting on a graph.
Like, the scare starts, and it gets worse and worse and worse,
and then Brian Deer's reporting comes out,
and bam, it's on its way back up.
Like, the truth does make a difference.
And then when Wakefield's license was taken away,
we went right back up to pre-scare levels.
Of course, getting chased out to America
meant he started peddling his lies in America,
so sorry about that, but it does seem pretty clear
that the truth helps people make up their minds
about this stuff.
Fascinatingly, a lot of Britain
seems to remember the MMR scare
and the revelation that it was based on lies
and learned a lesson about vaccine alarmism.
According to polls of global willingness
to take the COVID-19 vaccine,
other countries start relatively low,
perhaps dimly remembering some people
saying vaccines are bad.
Then acceptance grows as it becomes increasingly clear
the new vaccines are safe.
Wait, where's the UK?
Well, boys, we're just chilling up here.
We've been through this before, you see.
That's my British accent?
It seems like our past experience
with bullshit vaccine scares
has inoculated us against future ones.
Cat wrote that line.
I didn't find the one weird trick
doctors hate to deconverting people
from being against vaccines
and changing their minds or anything here.
What we've really discovered is that
if you lay the whole story out like this,
people can do a good job of making up their own minds.
The actual scientific community works very hard
to be receptive to potential side effects.
When even the potential maybe possibility maybe
of one of the vaccines having side effects came up,
the FDA and the CDC briefly recommended
not getting it for a while until later
when they checked and were sure it was fine.
Vaccine safety is taken extremely seriously
by medical scientists and doctors for obvious reasons.
Actually, here's a fun example of how stringent
the community is about vaccines.
Wakefield's alternative vaccine
was based on such bad science,
it would never have made it out of clinical trials.
The medical work behind it was awful.
I mean, one of its author's names
is spelled wrong on page one.
The science on the following pages
is roughly what you'd expect from something like that.
I think I might actually make a bonus video for patrons
just covering this vaccine patent
because it is whack.
Really, Andrew Wakefield was always doomed
to end up as a scam artist.
He wasn't very good at the science
when he was a doctor.
All the coronavirus vaccines currently in use
have passed tests and checks
that his alternative measles vaccine
would never have done.
Wakefield can pretend he's not gonna get the vaccine
and appear at health freedom summits
that recommend you don't get it
and instead eliminate toxins
with only affordable products and cooking hacks,
but I certainly hope for his sake
that he just gets the vaccine in secret
because otherwise the next cruise
is gonna have a fucking body count.
There is another way the truth can change people's minds.
Living proof.
If someone thinks the coronavirus vaccines
might be dangerous,
one of the best ways to help
seems to be people around them getting it
and showing them how it's fine.
In early polls before a vaccine was out,
a lot of people in the USA
claimed they were going to hold off
until they were sure it was safe,
which is a pretty risky decision
considering the danger of the virus
versus any possible side effects of the vaccine.
Like, a third of people who get infected,
even if it's minor,
are left with long-term complications,
like long-distance runners are left unable
to climb stairs without getting out of breath,
people have lost eyesight,
people have lost teeth,
and of course a lot of people have died of the disease,
but over time as more and more people did get the vaccine,
that by itself changed a lot of minds.
The truth is it was easy in 2020
to have your doubts about a theoretical vaccine
that no one had had yet,
but now when half the people around you already have it
and they're obviously fine,
it's a whole lot harder to have those doubts.
Over time, the people waiting and seeing
seem to have decided they've seen enough
and they want what those guys are having,
so this is my call to action in case anyone needs it.
You should get a COVID vaccine if you can.
You know, get one while you're there for your colonoscopy.
The vaccine makes life safer for you
and reduces the possibility of passing the virus
to someone more vulnerable,
so you won't have that on your conscience either.
I know having a conscience is virtue signaling now,
but still, it's a nice bonus,
and on top of that,
if there are people in your life who could be at risk
who need convincing of the vaccine's safety,
you could be the evidence they need.
It's amazing how compelling seeing other people
get vaccinated can be.
There is, sadly, one concerning thing about the data.
There are some people who started out
saying no to vaccination
and have largely stayed that way.
Maybe some of them will budge
as more and more people get vaccinated,
but there's probably a group who are so distrustful
of vaccines because of everything
we've discussed so far
that they can't have their minds changed
even by the hundreds of millions
of obviously completely safely vaccinated people
all around them.
People can invest a lot of ego and pride
in not accepting evidence
that contradicts their beliefs about the world,
and it really doesn't help that there are hundreds of people
exactly like Andrew Wakefield
who are ready to tell them everything they believe
is already true,
and they just need to buy their supplements
or DVDs or cooking hacks
and enable people to convince themselves
that they don't need to do any more thinking
for a small fee, of course.
Aw, come on, though.
Comparing Wakefield to Alex Jones,
that's a bit much.
There's no way Wakefield would stoop to...
Ha ha ha!
Have you learned nothing?
Good to have you here with us.
It's great to be here, Alex.
Thank you very much.
Changing these people's minds
really should be their job,
and it's nobody else's fault
that they're struggling with it,
but I think the future of this kind of discussion
resides in finding more compelling ways
of communicating the truth
to people who aren't used to hearing it.
I hope in some way this video has helped.
In the meantime, while we figure out
how to convince people who seem committed
to being never convinced,
at least the vaccine intended for them
can go to someone who's sure they want it.
Specifically, me.
Please send me their vaccine.
I was glad they were testing it on the old people first,
but it's been months now, and I want it.
I want to go outside.
Be able to go outside.
I want to pretend I shop at Waitrose again.
I want to use my free football tickets.
I want to taunt my former hairdresser
with how useless she is to me now
and threaten to turn her building
back into a research foundation.
Give me the vaccine, doctor.
Hell, give me all of them.
Let me combine their power.
Soon I will be unstoppable.
It's easy to get depressed and begin to believe
that you're basically locked in a room
with thousands of fucking idiots
who are just willing to say stupid shit constantly,
just committed to just being wrong,
but actually, the more I think about it,
I'm actually locked in a planet
with millions of people who do know better than these people,
but they're just so busy being depressed like me at them.
Maybe the answer here is that we just need to accept
that we should put the depression energy
into making a difference,
into changing the minds of the people who can be,
and into doing what we can to improve the state of our world
around these people,
and just let them be mad
and let them continue to be stupid,
but in a world where their kids won't die of polio
because we got rid of it for them.
Good for them, ignorant little wankers,
because maybe the hard thing to do
when we're confronted by the scope of these problems
is accept that we really can do something about it.
No matter how hopeless things may seem,
the world always can get better,
and maybe together,
someday, we can invent a way
of cleaning up this fucking mess in my mom's garage,
in my garage.
Hey, thank you for watching.
That was pretty good, wasn't it?
I managed to avoid getting too preachy at the end there.
I'd like to thank my patrons,
whose names are scrolling past the screen right now.
You guys literally keep the lights on.
I'd like to thank the sensitivity reader
who took a look at some of the segments
and made sure that we were using the appropriate language
when we were talking about autism.
I'd also really like to thank Brian Deer,
who's basically a superhero.
He's the guy who found out most of this stuff,
really saved the day,
and just thank you so much, man.
And also, while we were making this video,
Brian Deer released a book about the whole thing.
Deer's book,
the Doctor Who Fooled the World,
is basically the most definitive source
on Andrew Wakefield and all the damage he did.
I literally cannot recommend it enough
if the topic interests you at all.
Deer is by far the most knowledgeable person
on everything that happened.
I mean, he's the guy who discovered
most of it himself through actual decades
of investigative reporting.
I had no idea he was doing a book
until it came out when I was writing this video,
and with that,
it came out when I was writing this video,
and we just barely scratched the surface
of the stuff he covers.
There's a link to his site in the description,
and it's not an affiliate link or anything.
We're not being paid to do this.
I've decided he deserves your money.
I want him to be able to chart the release of this video
on a graph of his sales figures.
That's my personal fantasy.
Tell him Hbomb says hi.
If you want to know more about this whole topic
or just check out Brian Deer's honestly heroic reporting,
you should really go read his book
and go to briandeer.com
because it survived the lawsuit
and there's some great stuff there.
So thanks to Kat for doing all of that additional research
and for co-writing a lot of these segments
and just generally fact-checking me.
I got a lot of facts wrong,
and I'd like to thank my, uh, intern, Rachel,
uh, who did great work with the camera.
Don't do that.
Heh, heh, heh, heh.
Oh, wow, there are more credits.
Oh, my God.
Thank you so much for being
so patient with this video.
I'm actually surprised
we got it done so quickly, to be honest.
We had a whole production.
Like, we had to work with fact-checkers,
lawyers in two different countries
to make sure we couldn't get sued
for anything we were saying about these people
because, you know, you might have noticed
some of the characters in this story are litigious.
We conferred with vaccine experts,
doctors, science communicators,
medical researchers, sensitivity readers, animators.
You know, someone had to draw the internal anatomy
for that one thing.
I made an award-winning cartoonist
for the New Yorker spend hours of her life
drawing the courtroom from Phoenix Wright
for a joke that went by in, like, 10 seconds.
Sorry about that, by the way,
and my poor, long-suffering producer, Kat,
had to coordinate most of this for me
because I was busy editing the actual video,
and thank you to my patrons
for watching an early draft of this
and giving me feedback.
It turns out a bunch of people
who watch my videos are, like, scientists,
so we got some really good notes from them.
All in all, I'm pretty happy
with how this video turned out,
so, yeah, that's nice.
That said, I'm never putting this much effort
into a video again.
Forget it.
♪♪
Can you believe that Brian David Gilbert
did voices in this video?
That's great. It's amazing.
He sent me just video footage
of him dressed as Andrew Wakefield.
I didn't ask for him to do that.
He just sent that to me.
Like, what a cool guy.
That was great.
Oh!
Oh!
Oh!
