Hello internet.
A lot of you sent me this image making the rounds which concerns the Mayan prediction
that the world will end on December 21st, 2012.
The claimants of the Mayan calendar short counted the years because they forgot about
leap days so the world should have already ended.
This is followed by mind equals blown which I'm not sure how to take.
Do people think that the world forgot to have its apocalypse or that were it not for leap
days we'd be already living in the future?
Either way it spawned many an argument and people asked me to explain which I'm happy
to do because my next big video was delayed by Pestilence which struck me down into the
depths of unproductive misery for the last few weeks.
So if you haven't already please watch the related videos now as otherwise this won't
make a whole lot of sense and there are a few corrections I'd like to make.
The first of these is that I shouldn't have called the Mayans Mayans.
Maya is the correct singular and plural noun to use in the same way that sheep is both
singular and plural.
Mayan is the name of the language and the adjective form of the word as in the Mayan
civilization.
Secondly, I showed a picture of the Aztec calendar stone rather than a Mayan calendar
in my 2012 video which at the time I thought was okay because the Aztec calendar is the
same as the Mayan just with different names sort of like the Greek and Roman gods.
And frankly the Aztec one is much cooler looking but I was still wrong to show it because despite
naming it the Aztec calendar stone archaeologists don't actually think it's a calendar.
And speaking of stone I used the term Stone Age to describe the Maya which made many people
very angry.
For clarity Stone Age doesn't mean stupid it's the technological classification of a
civilization limited to stone tools.
Advanced how their astronomy and mathematics were the Maya never discovered metallurgy
and thus couldn't move on to the Bronze Age then the Iron Age then the Diamond Age.
Right enough corrections it's explanation time for this image which raises three questions.
One does the Mayan calendar have leap days?
Two do the Mayan miscount the years?
Three should the world have already ended?
The answer to all of these is no.
To briefly recap leap years exist to stop seasons drifting out of sync with the calendar
a problem that vexed Pope Gregory because every year Easter and Spring were getting
further apart.
To fix this he introduced the modestly named Gregorian calendar with its fancy leap year
rules to keep the seasons and thus the holidays together.
But while Pope Gregory cared about the seasons the ancient Maya did not.
Presumably because where they lived the weather comes in only one season.
Too hot and too humid.
So the Mayan calendar ignores seasons in favor of accurately tracking the days since creation
in the Mayan religion.
This renders leap years an unnecessary complication.
Though the Mayan calendar is no stranger to complication with its cycles within cycles
within cycles within cycles within cycles that, if you're interested, Hank Green can
tell you much more about.
But back to the miscounting claim which comes from our idea that leap days are extra days
which of course they really aren't.
The Gregorian calendar doesn't give people extra days any more than Daylight Saving Time
gives people extra sunlight.
If you transported Pope Gregory a thousand years back in time to meet the Mayan Lady
Shook and then made them count the days until this year's Winter Solstice they'd agree on
that number because they're just counting sunrises.
It's not like Pope Gregory with his clever modern calendar would notice 500 plus days
that the Lady Shook somehow missed, perhaps while distracted by the pain from her thorns
through the tongue routine.
The only thing they would disagree on is what to call that day with Pope Gregory insisting
on December 21st 2012 and Lady Shook preferring the 13th baktun.
So this image is wrong because it's an apples to oranges comparison.
The Mayan calendar doesn't have leap days because it doesn't need them.
It counts days just fine and its long cycle will finish on December 21st 2012 but the
world will still go on.
