My last video, Human Evolution Made Easy, showed how mitochondrial DNA can be used to
trace our most recent common matrilineal female ancestor, who lived about 150,000 years ago
in Africa.
But the same can be done for markers on the Y chromosome, which are only passed from father
to son.
Our most recent common male ancestor also lived in Africa, but much later, around 60,000
years ago.
This video will look at what happened next, and how we know that these ancestors migrated
out of Africa, and the routes they took to colonise the world.
To understand that evidence, we first need to understand these DNA markers.
DNA consists of two intertwining strands, which are basically joined up chemicals called
nucleotides.
Just four different types of nucleotide are found on each strand, adenine, thymine, cytosine
and guanine.
To glue the two strands together, adenine always pairs with thymine, and cytosine always
pairs with guanine, that's just the nature of their chemical bonds.
When DNA copies itself, the copies aren't always perfect, so sometimes the wrong nucleotide
will be put in place, in this case adenine instead of cytosine.
If that isn't corrected, the pairing nucleotide will also be wrong, so you've got yourself
a mutation, a marker.
If the marker is on mitochondrial DNA, that marker will be passed down through every female
descendant without alteration.
If it's on Y chromosome DNA, it'll be passed down through every male descendant without
alteration.
So if we find a marker in people today, we can trace it back through thousands of generations
to find out when and where it started.
Now imagine if all these people were migrating.
This group stays put, this group moves north, and in this group, headed east, a baby boy
is born with a unique marker on his Y chromosome.
The baby grows up and has male children, who also carry the same marker.
As the group continues its migration, some tribes settle and others keep moving eastwards.
Like a leaky boat, the movement leaves in its wake a trail of descendants with the red
genetic marker.
So by checking the DNA of people living today, we find those with the same genetic markers.
This map shows the distribution of men with a marker on their Y chromosome called M130.
We can wind this film backwards and follow the migration route they took, which was the
first complete one out of Africa around 60,000 years ago.
That was the basis for the study conducted by Spencer Wells and others in 2000, which
involved collecting DNA samples from indigenous people all over the world.
Wells found distinctive genetic markers and traced each back to its source, marked here
by red circles.
We're retracing the migration paths our ancestors took backwards through time, and this is where
they started once again in Africa.
Because the mutations happen at a fairly regular rate, these ancestral markers can even be
dated, so the time scale on this map marks the progress of each migration.
Markers that stay put and don't migrate will, of course, have a lot more of these genetic
markers, so it's not surprising that we find the greatest genetic diversity in Africa.
But the greatest of all belongs to a people whose ancestral homeland once extended from
South Africa to the Rift Valley.
Wherever you're from in the world, whatever mitochondrial or Y chromosome DNA markers
you have, you can trace your ancestry back to the people whose modern descendants are
the sand, the bushmen, the living embodiment of all modern humans.
The DNA evidence coincides perfectly with climatological evidence that shows these migrations
occurred when East Africa was wetter and the Sahara was a savannah.
Humans followed, migrating herds across it, but when the climate became drier, the Sahara
turned to desert.
Effectively, it slammed shut like a gate.
When the Saharan climate improved again, DNA evidence, coincidentally, shows a second great
migration.
This was the big one.
Our ancestors moved into the heart of Europe and Asia, then later across a land bridge
into the Americas.
Wherever they went, humans adapted to the climate and new diets.
People moving into northern climates lost the melanin in their skins.
Melanin inhibits the production of vitamin D by sunlight.
That's no problem in sunny Africa, but a drawback in northern latitudes.
As long as they were moving and opening up new territory, there was plenty of space for
excess populations to expand.
But around 20,000 years ago, the human diaspora had filled nearly every continent.
Settled populations began to grow.
What we learned in primary school is that Stone Age humans were hunter-gatherers living
in small tribes, then all of a sudden they discovered farming, settled down, built towns,
and invented writing.
But if humans had been around for over 100,000 years, why did they suddenly become civilized
in different parts of the world at the same time?
Fundamentalists point to this primary school explanation as proof that our species is very
young.
But of course, if you don't look beyond simplified explanations, you never gain more than a simplified
understanding.
Archaeologists don't see civilization as something that appeared out of the blue, like a light
suddenly banishing the darkness of the Stone Age.
Instead, they see increasingly complex and hierarchical societies.
In Europe and the Middle East, people were living in semi-permanent settlements 20,000
years before the first pyramids were built, and 12,000 years before farming was discovered.
They had art, culture, religion, medicine, and a growing technology.
They mass-produced beads and mined obsidian and flint for export, then transported them
over extensive trading routes.
They criss-crossed the Mediterranean in trading boats, and far from having lives that were
nasty, brutish, and short, most of them lived to be grandparents and enjoyed healthy food
surpluses.
Even 6,000 years before farming was introduced, people in northern Mesopotamia were living
in sophisticated settlements.
This is a temple complex dating back 11,000 years.
Further south, the people called the Natufians were also living in permanent villages, and
there's evidence they stored grain.
But then came the next big change.
In the Middle East, the climate dried.
Whether people began planting crops because they'd become scarce in the wild, or whether
scattered populations had to congregate around oases and rivers because water was scarce,
whatever the case, farming seems to have begun out of necessity.
Over several hundred years it took hold in Mesopotamia and the Yellow River Valley, apparently
independently.
It took a thousand more years for the practice to spread via trade routes to the Indus Valley,
the Nile Valley, and other parts of Eurasia.
But the payoff from farming was huge.
It opened the way for larger settlements, technological innovation, and accelerated
trade and writing.
The motivation of these megalithic and neolithic people may always be debatable, but nothing
contradicts the hard evidence of DNA.
Tracing our ancestry uses exactly the same techniques used in determining paternity and
convicting criminals.
If fundamentalists want to reject the techniques that prove our origins and migrations out
of Africa, then they have to reject the same DNA techniques that help convict rapists and
murderers.
Now that's a tough call for evangelical preachers.
The DNA evidence also fits perfectly with the climatological and archaeological evidence.
We have a lot more to learn, but we do at least know how we got here.
And so we come to the present day, having traced our origins in this series all the
way from the Big Bang.
Of course, to use a cliche, this is all ancient history.
But to those with a yearning to know who they are and where they came from, it's a history
that made us who we are.
To understand that, just look at Britain's oldest complete skeleton, 9,000-year-old Cheddar
Man.
In 1997, DNA was taken from the skeleton and compared to people from the area.
They discovered one of Cheddar Man's direct descendants, a schoolteacher, living just
half a mile from where the skeleton was found.
