Yeah, I know Jon and I have, have you watched Nickatine2's recent videos on ethics where
he's sort of battling himself?
Yeah, I like that.
I mean that's, that's brilliant, the almost schizophrenic multi-personality I think is
a good, just underlying kind of way to look at things, it's more complexity than initially
things seem to be, even in ourselves, so.
So yeah, I guess we could start with, with ethics, I mean I know you, you're an atheist
and you obviously think that there's a way to preserve morality and ethics independent
of any theological worldview, right?
Yeah, I think so.
So how do you, how do you ground your ethical system, granted that there's some ambiguity
there for you in light of these last two videos, but, you know, how do you approach the thing?
Well, I mean I know you hate doing this, but suppose we were to start in sort of a place
of Cartesian skepticism, where we, where we know what it feels like to have desires, to
feel pleasure, to feel pain, and we can infer that other people have similar sensations,
that other people have desires and wishes and can feel pain and suffering just as we
can, and we can empathize with them, we can, we have the imaginative power to put ourselves
in their place and act in a way that benefits not only our own selves, our own interests,
but also the interests of other minds.
Right, yeah.
So empathy then would be the basis of, of morality?
Yeah, that's pretty much it.
Okay.
And you know, you said we have to begin with a sort of Cartesian skepticism to write.
We don't have to, but we could.
Right.
Well, I mean, it almost seemed to me though that it's sort of, while Descartes sort of
skepticism involves reflection, I think empathy with others is sort of immediate, you know,
when you see someone who's in pain, you just feel their pain, you know, not literally.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, it's much more immediate than that.
You're right.
I mean, Descartes' skepticism is, I mean, I don't, he didn't even believe that for a
second.
That was just his method.
You know, that's something you only come to through thinking about it a lot.
Immediately, there's no question that other people have experiences like your own.
Right.
Yeah.
I would hope not.
But, you know.
Yeah, I would hope not.
But there's something to reflecting on it, you know, after all said and done, after the
immediate event is done, you have time to go back and sip a little wine and reflect
on it.
Is there something to that dimension that complexifies and matures your empathy?
Is it, would you say that's accurate, Nick?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, maybe we could just make a distinction between ethics and morality where ethics is
sort of the practical action in the day-to-day world and then when you come up with a moral
philosophy, that's when you start reflecting on, wait a minute, maybe that ethical decision
I made in the heat of battle wasn't exactly as moral as it could have been.
That's right.
Well, you know, when you're in day-to-day life, you don't always have a chance to like
reflect on what the most moral action might be in that situation.
Well, yeah.
To sit there for now, we're thinking about whether you're going to give someone a transplant
or so.
Yeah.
Right.
You don't have time to think about these things.
And I like, we're talking about ethics.
I like how movies, especially a movie we just saw District 9 on, I don't know if you've
seen that Nick yet.
It ultimately comes out to be a very strong ethical movie.
There's lots of questions amongst all this action and some comical scenes, there are
some really ethical dilemmas in the movie, which I think is good that's promoted in a,
it's a popular kind of meme.
So is it infiltrating pop culture these days, ethics, like through movies like The Matrix,
movies like District 9, is that the way to do it?
Is our sound okay?
Yeah.
I think there's usually, yeah, a lot of movies have some kind of ethical message in them.
I mean, even like the most named superhero movie usually makes some attempt at some kind
of ethical situation.
Well, I remember the most recent, The Dark Knight, the Batman movie, had a bunch of stuff
in that.
Like there was one scene I remember where the Joker has these two boats full of people,
one's all prisoners and one's all just regular people and he's trying to get them to blow
each other up or something.
Right.
Yeah.
And then you see people getting ready to, getting a trigger, and then you actually see
the criminal do one of the most ethical things and he throws it out, you know, we're the
bad guys.
Right.
Yeah, so they're trying to, I mean, I guess it's the skillful means, is that right?
The right director knows how to do it the right way, I suppose?
Yeah.
Right.
Yeah.
Okay.
Well, so I guess, where else can we go with ethics?
Ethics is a big thing.
We don't have to abandon it so far, I mean, a lot of people get into serious arguments
about ethics and when do we put in relativism?
How big of a postmodern kind of world view do you adapt?
What's healthy in your view before it goes to mushy, mushy, gushy, gushy?
Well, I mean, that's a difficult question because you do have these striking examples
of other cultures where things are completely different, like am I allowed, for example,
to condemn someone, an Islamic extremist who kills their own daughter because she left
the religion or something and I almost can't help condemning them, but on the other hand...
That seems like an easier question to answer, I mean, when it's taking someone's life, but
what about like, you know, the headscarves and whatnot?
Do you think women should be explored dressed like women?
Oh, yeah, well, that stuff, I mean, that's relatively minor, I mean, I don't have any
huge objection to women wearing headscarves.
The burqa is a little more up in the air because a lot of times the women wearing those things
are not doing so their own, you know, they're not making a fashion statement, they have
a man and a life enforcing this.
Where was it in, was it Lebanon recently that a woman was wearing pants in public and she...
Yeah, was sentenced to death wearing pants, right.
Was it death or just lashings or something?
No, it was like the lashing equivalent of a death sentence, like 40 lashings or something.
Oh, yeah.
There's a part of you that just says, what the fuck is going on?
That's ridiculous.
I think that's, I mean, but see, just if we can all agree that that's ridiculous, another
moral question is, should we actually go to Lebanon invading it and actually try to change
it?
That's, I'll cover up with Professor Anton actually is the concept of, and you're going
to get a lot of people hissing and moaning at this, a one-world type of governing system
body.
But it's also, to try to fix the problem would cause, at least initially, more violence and
death than the problem itself.
This is also seen in movies.
I mean, more absolute power, would that corrupt?
Absolutely.
I mean, I think, I've seen a video where you've actually quoted that and tried to explain
about that, but it just seems like, what do you do?
This is just this dilemma, do we just let them be or do we go absolute, Ron Paul, libertarian,
you know, you guys go for it, how about it, you know?
So what, I mean, how do you deal with some of these questions where you see the truth,
the grain of truth that they bring to the perspective?
Like there's a party that nods, like, yeah, it makes sense, but at the same time, it conflicts.
This is strange.
Yeah.
Well, let me ask you, Nikitin, do you think that there is in any way a good, a capital
G good that's greater than any particular cultural good that sort of has authority over
what any particular world you may think is good?
Or do you think that that's just an illusion?
I don't think so.
I don't think that exists.
I think good is a creation of our own minds and our own minds are, of course, running
a lot of cultural software that are influencing it.
I mean, I think there are some basic ideas that are so a part of who we are, biologically
speaking, that pretty much all of us, with the exception of, say, sociopaths, have these
intuitions and feelings, but I don't think there's like a good floating out in the way.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Right.
Right.
Well, I think someone else watching this might interpret that, like, you take the stance
of amendum.
He thinks there's an objective, you know, it's a fact of suffering, so not suffering
would be objectively good for him.
Right.
And you try to say, well, that does a subjective spin, not that it's wrong, or an intersubjective
spin, but he says, no, you're fucked-hearted, it has to be, it is an objective kind of thing.
Yeah, you're right.
Yeah.
Amendum, he said suffering is fucking objective.
You know, I've never been able to figure out what he means by that, because to me, it seems
like suffering, pleasure, color, all of that is fairly subjective.
So I can't even figure out what he's trying to say.
I agree with the underlying message that he's trying to convey, just not the way he tries
to convey it.
I usually agree with the inclusions he draws, but the way he comes to conclusions is weird.
