When I first went on YouTube around 10 years ago, it was a place where intelligent and
educated skeptics, gravity, freethinkers, my cock, and radicals could come together
to berate hucksters and idiots.
Sadly, this golden age has ended, and according to Thunderf00t, the atheist community's self-appointed
leader and champion, it's all the fault of a bunch of uppity women, black people, and
queers, who came along and ruined everything by demanding that we respect their feelings.
This is wrong. Let's talk about why.
I've looked in the grass. I've looked in the bush. I'm not finding Jesus anywhere.
For viewers who are new around here, I'll provide a little backstory.
The New Atheist movement began with the publication of The End of Faith in 2004.
The movement was centered around four white men, each of whom once had something interesting to
say, and one of whom once invited me back to his hotel room for a cup of coffee before he f***ed.
The YouTube branch of the movement was mainly a bunch of nerdy, socially awkward white men,
like your humble narrator. Our intellects and libidos flourished in the new digital medium.
YouTube was a venue for isolated people to connect with each other,
carrying on discussions and complaining about things that we couldn't complain about elsewhere.
Since then, many of the community's central figures have stopped making videos,
or have moved on to other subjects. So what happened? How come new atheism has faded away?
Now I want you to keep in mind that I'm an aging pseudo-intellectual twink with an alcohol problem,
and I'm not claiming to be smarter than Thunderf00t, but sometimes the simplest
answer is the best. New atheism was a trend, and like all trends, it died out.
As a topic of discussion, atheism is inherently limited. There are only so many different ways
you can say that God does not exist. I think when it comes down to it, people just got bored.
Meanwhile, new social movements have arrived, drawing attention to a different set of problems.
Some YouTubers have adapted to the new moral climate, while others have doubled down on fear
and hatred and madness and darkness. I want to argue that the reactionary approach of Thunderf00t
and others to feminism is fucking shit. But first I want to clear something up. I am not a social
justice warrior, and just an independent free-thinking skeptic who looks at the evidence
and reaches my own conclusions. I actually think there's a lot of really bad stuff going on in
social justice circles lately, from substituting weird alienating jargon for plain English,
to celebrating activists' ugliest impulses, to crusading against trivial or nonsensical offenses,
to single-mindedly focusing on some pet social justice issue at the expense of all nuance.
But the truth is that you can find people behaving terribly within any movement. On both sides of
this debate, and every other, there will be those who act and think in petty, selfish,
and small-minded ways. That's human nature, not feminism. The intellectually responsible
thing to do is try to filter all the nonsense out, and address only the strongest arguments
that each side has to offer. But that's boring as hell, so fuck it.
Thunderf00t and his allies claim to be knights of reason, championing objectivity, evidence,
and difficult truths against a horde of oversensitive crybabies, who take offense
and retreat to their safe spaces at the slightest whiff of opposition. But ironically, the Thunder
feet of the world are often just as eager to take offense. Feminist Rebecca Watson begins
one of her videos like this. Hello, YouTube. It's been a while. I've missed you, and I'm
guessing that you've missed me too, because I've heard that if a male atheist on YouTube
goes too long without calling a woman a cunt, his balls will actually shrivel up and then
tuck up inside of him, forming what some call a man-gina. And while this is not the height
of comedy, take a look at how Thunderf00t responds. And that was it. That's how the
face of feminism in atheism thinks it's the best way to start a charity fundraiser, using
this passive-aggressive victim routine to spit poison at the entire male atheist audience.
He's essentially crying sexism. Jesus, Thunderf00t, can't you take a joke? Why are these anti-feminists
so oversensitive? And this bit of offense-taking is the flimsy beginning of a video with the
absurdly overstated thesis that feminism poisons everything. This kind of exaggeration was
sort of cute when Hitchens did it, but it certainly lost its charm. Really? Feminism
poisons everything? Did it poison my coffee? How can such a pretty wife make such bad coffee?
I heard that. In another video, Thunderf00t complains that atheist conferences are filled
with politically correct whiners. I am cisgender, male, poly, and disabled, so I've got a lot
of privilege on this panel. Some of the issues facing the LGBT, like, past marriage, definitely
bi-phobia and pan-phobia. I'm a trans woman, an atheist, I'm poly, and I'm gay. Honestly,
Thunderf00t, I don't like listening to this shit any more than you do. I don't think anyone
likes listening to it. Not even a gay, bi, gender, polysexual wolfkin. But not all anger
is righteous, and some feelings are best kept to yourself. Your whole argument is that
social justice warriors have ruined atheism by talking about gender issues, which you
say you don't care about. Is that why you've made 54 videos about how much you fucking
hate feminism? God damn it. This is just not the behavior of a man who doesn't care about
gender politics. Compare Thunderf00t's channel, which for the last couple years has been mostly
about feminism, with a little science thrown in here and there, with Rebecca Watson, who
vlogs mostly about science. Even when Thunderf00t chooses the right opponents, he still gets
it wrong. I'm not a fan of Anita Sarkeesian myself. I think she's a single-minded moral
fanatic with a one-note worldview.
Pornographic adolescent boy fantasies.
Ultimate misogynistic male fantasy.
A choose-your-own-patriarchal-adventure porno fantasy.
Adolescent male power fantasy.
Most of her videos involve banal feminism 101-type critiques of video games, an art
form that she basically disdains, and seems to view only as an opportunity for her to
exercise a repetitive, tiresome style of generic, feminist nitpicking. And yet the
central argument for videos is that video games often contain lazy and sexist writing
that excludes women from an important area of cultural life. This seems to me obviously
true, regardless of Anita's tedious treatment of the subject, or her questionable crowdfunding
practices. But look how Thunderf00t responds when faced with Anita's totally obvious and
banal evidence that men who make video games like to look at women's butts.
Most women know that they have wider hips than men, because that's where the babies
come out. You know, it's that whole birthing canal thing.
His response is essentially to say, nuh-uh, this is just a scientific objective representation
of female anatomy. Men don't like to look at women's butts. Resident Evil 2 is just
a scientific documentary about the skeletal anatomy of a female woman.
And here I was about to accuse Anita of stating the obvious, as if we need a pop-culture critic
to reveal the shocking evidence that men like looking at lady butts.
The problem with Thunderf00t's approach to this topic is he objects to the worst arguments
of two or three feminists on the internet, and then concludes that all feminism poisons
everything. He doesn't respond to or even seem to be aware of the body of scientific
evidence suggesting that misogyny is real, that workplace discrimination hurts women,
and that a cultural hostile to women is particularly bad in STEM fields. You know, like the field
that he's in. He doesn't seem to be at all worried about how reactionary his views are
and the company they put him in. There's a huge surge of right-wing commentary on YouTube
right now, and Thunderf00t's ideas fit right in with the rest of them, even with people
like this tedious antelope, Slenderman, the Dragonborn, a gay Nazi, the Tin Man, a stilted
vampire, a Sumerian monarch, a fake university, and the queen of the internet. It seems Thunderf00t's
already getting chummy with some of them, like in this video where he, the amazing atheist,
and Scotty hold a Skype conference call so they can all critique Rebecca Watson's views
and physical appearance for 25 minutes. Does anyone else think these guys seem weirdly
intimidated by women who don't agree with them? This sort of thing makes you suspect
that this virulent anti-feminism isn't a serious political position at all. It seems more like
a web of excuses to cling to ugly and discredited behavior. It's too bad, since I think that
feminism would really benefit from engaging with some earnest and serious criticism. Unfortunately,
the brand of anti-feminism represented by Thunderf00t and most of his YouTube allies
only makes it more difficult to start a real conversation. And a prominent scientist in
the STEM field using his influence and audience to levy tirades against all feminists. Well,
it's just kinda shitty. If you liked this video, please like, share, and subscribe. You can also
follow me on Twitter, Tinder, Tumblr, Grindr, Fister, Bucker, Cocker, Fet Life, RedTube,
and Christian Mingle.
Soon I will be beautiful. Soon I will be perfect.
