Primary elections are how political parties in the United States pick their
strongest candidate to run for president. The parties do this by holding many
elections in each of the states and the candidates with the most votes from
these elections becomes the party's official nominees. These nominees then
face each other in the national election for president. But this isn't the whole
story. There are five things that make it a bit more complicated than that.
Complication number one, primaries versus caucuses. In every state the local party
leaders decide how to run their elections. The two most common choices
are primaries and caucuses. Primaries are just like standard elections. Go to the
polls whenever you can, stand in a long line, hide in a booth, then tick a box or
press a button and your vote is cast in complete anonymity. A caucus however is a
public vote. People gather in groups wherever space is available then
literally take sides in a room with everyone else who likes the same
candidate. The groups debate each other and if people change their minds they
need to physically switch sides. At the end of the debates the party
representatives count the number of people in each group. If you leave too
early your vote doesn't count. This description of primaries and caucuses is
really all you need to know but the specifics can vary wildly. That's because
there are 50 states all of which hold at least two primaries and caucuses for the
big parties and possibly more for the small parties. Covering all the local
variants would take a tediously long time which your short attention span for
boring political videos wouldn't tolerate. And you need to stay focused
because there are four more things to come.
Complication number two, who can vote. In the national presidential election all
American citizens over the age of 18 can vote with two exceptions. You can't
live here or here. But primaries are in-state elections with lots of
different rules. Most states and parties will only let you vote in the primary if
you're an official member of the party. This is called a closed primary because
the voting is closed to non party members. But some citizens are
independents and not registered with any party. If you're an independent and live
in a state with closed party elections, tough luck. No voting for you. Some states
however have semi closed primaries where independents can pick one and only one
primary to vote in. Parties allow this because the presidential election is
often determined by independents so knowing which candidates they like is
useful.
Finally a few states and parties really play it fast and loose with open
primaries. Here any citizen no matter which party they're registered with can
pick a primary to vote in. But it's not just the states that have primaries.
They're also held in the District of Columbia and the off forgotten
territories. Holding primaries here is a bit odd though considering that
territorial residents can't vote in the actual presidential election.
Lastly are the Americans living abroad who depending on the party vote in a
block as though they all live together in one big extra state. When all these
elections take place depends on...
Complication number three. Who votes when? Primaries aren't conducted all at once
but are spread out over a year.
This leads to fights between the states about who gets to be at the head of the
line and who is stuck at the back.
Inevitably last-minute leapfrogging of dates happens even though the parties
often take away votes from these uncivil states. When it comes to being number one
nobody beats New Hampshire who wrote it into state law that their primary will
always be at least a week ahead of everyone else's. Which isn't a problem
until some other state gets the bright idea to do the same and then we have an
infinite loop in our system and have to force quit the law.
But wait you say, doesn't Iowa already go first? Yes but New Hampshire lets them
get away with it for two reasons.
First Iowa's election is a caucus and so New Hampshire is still technically the
first primary and second New Hampshire thinks that Iowa is stupid and doesn't
matter.
Other states try to boost their influence not by cutting in line but by
forming an alliance and holding their primaries at the same time. The biggest
alliance of the election cycle is called Super Tuesday where depending on
how many states can agree with each other around half of them might
participate giving out a whole pile of votes.
Which brings us to complication number four, votes that aren't votes.
So this whole time you were probably thinking that citizens gave votes
straight to the candidates but no.
Instead the votes are given to a bunch of guys called delegates who in turn
give them to the candidates as requested.
Maybe. Depending on the state delegates might be required to vote as the
citizens did or they might be completely free to ignore the citizens and vote for
whomever they want.
Who are these people? The delegates are local party VIPs such as state reps and
officials. The more citizens who live in a state the more delegates that state
gets. Later in the year when all the states have finished their primaries the
delegates travel to a huge gathering for their party called the National
Convention.
It's here that the official vote to select the party's nominee for president
happens. But it's not just the delegates who do the voting.
Complication number five, super delegates. Super delegates are the top members of
the party such as congressmen and former presidents. They go to the National
Convention not to represent the people but to represent the current party
establishment and can vote for whomever they want.
Depending on the party super delegates might be up to 20 percent of the voters
at the National Convention. Usually by the time the National Convention happens
all the candidates save one have dropped out of the race so the convention is
just a rubber stamp and a big party. But if the fight between candidates is still
ongoing the delegates and super delegates are the ones with the final
decision. In summary, over the course of a year the states plus DC plus the
territories and the Americans abroad hold their primaries or caucuses. When
finished the delegates representing the citizens who voted in those elections
travel to the National Convention.
Most of the delegates are forced to vote as the citizens of their state wanted
them to but some of them are free to vote as they like. At the National
Convention the delegates meet up with the super delegates who represent the
best interests of the party and together they make the final decision on who will
be the nominee for president. Tired?
Don't be because only now does the race for the presidency begin.
Of course you could skip all that and jump straight into the election as an
independent. The only downside to this strategy is near certain defeat.
