All right, hey!
Ah, we're girly!
We're girly!
We drink mimosas!
Yeah, that's right, we're wearing shorts.
And shitboard glasses.
Hey, that's, that's what champagne is supposed to be served in, it's like these 1920s style
glasses that we totally didn't drink margaritas out of last week.
I was 10.
How did you find Conbravo?
It was great!
So many people wanted to hear about sexy Cthulhu.
Yeah, and so many people were kind of, uh, bewildered, I guess?
Um, so, oh, it's Twilight with Cthulhu.
They would either run screaming or be like, shit, I have to read that!
Yeah, there was a lot of, like, I gotta buy this out of morbid curiosity.
So if you happen to, um, you know, get one of these things, and if you had the time to
read it, go on to Goodreads and leave Sarah a review.
She will really appreciate it.
She really, like, desperately needs validation, and if you're a hater, that's okay.
She needs validation from you too, attention is attention.
So we had this little temporary version that we printed off specifically for Conbravo and
for this bookstore launch.
Yeah, we made it small and cheap and we just got it out there real quick.
But, uh, now we need to start thinking about the for real launch since we're doing it the
old fashioned way where we have to, like, build buzz and, uh.
Yeah, I mean, that's the way the publishing industry is now.
Even if you get picked up by a real agent and a real publisher, they still expect you
to do a lot of your own marketing.
And it ends up just taking, like, half the length of time.
The publishing is just, like, the pre-release buzz business and it just takes so freaking
long.
Like, two years, so we're thinking more like.
A month.
A month.
Yeah, a month.
Cause, cause.
From now.
Yeah, from now.
Cause we're impatient and we know that you're probably going to forget about it if we wait
too much longer.
Strike the iron while it's hot.
Yeah, but we're going to try and do, like, all the stuff that you're supposed to do in,
uh, like, you know, six to nine months in, uh, one.
So that means we need a cover.
Like a real one.
A real one is a cover that is the trope-iest of, you know, cliché-ist of what is young
adult today.
Or yesterday.
Or what people think about.
Yeah.
What do we got?
What's we got?
Okay, so here's some examples.
You've got the typical simple object on black.
That's, that's your, your twilight and everything there derived.
You've got your simple object, but boys will like this too.
This is actually, like, this is, I think, is why, uh, The Hunger Games is so brilliant
is because it's so gender neutral.
This is still three years, four years old.
No, this is way older.
Yeah, so that's old.
So here is.
But that doesn't, like, it's okay.
Cause people are still.
This is 2008, so this is five years old.
Yeah, but this is what's, what that's turned into.
Like, you can see the influence of The Hunger Games and the twilight.
This is two-ish.
This one's two years old, which totally isn't ripping off.
Hunger Games or Twilight.
Hunger Games or Twilight at all.
And this is what we have today, which is what I like to call.
The movie poster.
Girl is going places.
She is going from point A to point B and, uh, she's alone and you can relate to her
also a lone girl.
So these are just some good examples.
So for instance, like this one uses a photograph.
If you do use a photograph, people.
Who are entering our contest.
People who are entering our contest, you absolutely have to own the copyright, whether you bought
it or licensed it from a friend.
If you use a photograph, that's fine, but you absolutely have to own the copyright.
That is a prerequisite.
You could also take photographs yourself, but that does not mean, uh, necessarily that
it has to be a photo.
It could be something like this.
Now, this is a lot like The Hunger Games really, because like in The Hunger Games, this is
like the little pendant that she gets and here, this is like, she gets a little tattoo,
which is like the symbol of her little Gryffindor that, uh, punches people.
Well, this is not necessarily YA, but it's sort of a lot.
This is chiclet.
Yeah.
This is a chiclet cover.
This is a lot like, you see a lot of YA right now because it's got like a lady doing, going
somewhere.
Yeah.
Without this, this, that's your something.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, Sarah's like, tentacles are gross.
I wouldn't put those on the cover.
Well, obviously.
If she doesn't think tentacles are gross because she wrote Twilight with Cthulhu, I think there's
something there.
Yeah.
She just doesn't want to admit it publicly.
Yeah.
No, I feel like I could totally see like some of these, uh, you know, really recent artsy
YA covers, maybe with like the silhouette of a really like.
It's the shadow box.
Yeah, the shadow box.
With the tentacles coming down.
But there's tentacles in there.
Yeah.
Mopey girls with no face.
That's super, super points.
Okay.
So in our little audition process, it's going to be very similar to what we did for the
Ghost Riders, but, uh, we do not want a finished polished work.
Yeah.
Don't waste your time.
Do not waste your time doing an entire thing.
Please.
We're not worth it.
Yeah.
So what we're going to do is we're going to ask for a proposal, which will come in the
form of a sketch.
We would also like the title to be on it and also Sarah's name.
So a sketch of what you think the book facing cover would look like.
And our book cover is five and a half by eight and a half.
Yeah.
So keep those proportions in mind.
Yeah.
It doesn't have to be perfect for your sketch, but you know, if that helps you.
Also provide a link to an online portfolio so we can see other examples of your work.
Also provide a tagline.
Bonus points for good taglines.
So a tagline.
This is Divergent, a very recent YA novel that's tagline is, one choice can transform
you.
You know, that comes straight off the back, which is part of their copy.
And on the back of our book will be our Goodreads copy, which if you go to Sarah's Goodreads
website, goodreads.com, Sarah Ellenson, you can read the description of her book has the
exact copy, which is going to be on the back of the book.
So if you want to pull something from there or something to do with love.
Dark.
Dark depths of love.
Depths.
Yeah, like our example tagline is like, even from the darkest depths, love may rise.
And in addition to these three things, sketch proposal, potential tagline, link to online
portfolio, nothing.
Please do not send us anything else.
No life stories, no witty anecdotes, no cover letter, no hi, how are you?
Just keep it to the basics.
So we want this a week from today, Monday, August 12th, by midnight, Monday night, Tuesday
early morning, Eastern Standard Daylight.
Because we are New York, center of the world.
And then on Tuesday, after we get everything, we're going to narrow it down to some finalists
and then we'll release another video sharing our finalists and then asking you, the viewer,
to help us decide from these finalists who our lucky hiree will be.
Yes, exactly.
And we will give you a hiree's commission fee like we did for our Ghostwriters.
And you will get credit on the back of the book, like you can see on Wendy's.
Unlike the Ghostwriters.
Cover art designed by you.
Yes, you can have your name on a terrible book.
Don't you want it?
You can put it on your resume.
It's an awesome book.
I mean, it's a great book.
It's a great book.
It's so romantic.
Where's mine?
After we've narrowed down our finalists, we will choose a winner and then that winner
will have one week to give us the finished product.
And then a week-ish from that day is our book launch.
Book launch, which is going to be Friday, August 30th.
Labor Day weekend.
And we are going to have a party, probably, at a bookstore, probably, locally here in
New York City, probably, probably, a book launch party, which you are all invited to
and Sarah will be there in picture and you can get your book signed by Sarah and everything.
So yeah, there's going to be a book launch party on Friday, August 30th and that will
also be when it becomes available on Amazon and on all the e-sites that are affiliated
with that because we're going to do the wide release.
And it will be available, yes, to you people who do not live in America.
You will be able to order it to have it shipped to you, so you can order it from Amazon in
print or in e-book.
Yeah, so if you want the e-book version, we got that.
If you want a non-Kindle version, you convert it like I do.
And yeah, it's really easy.
We will provide information on that later.
And also, if you want a hard copy, we got that too.
Thank you, Amazon.
And thank you very much to my unnamed friends at certain literary agencies that gave me
advice on self-publishing in the modern era and how you can make it work best for you,
which we will talk about on a later episode.
And of course, if you have happened to come across a copy of Awoken, please leave a review
on Goodreads.
Otherwise, add it to your to-read list.
And we look forward to your submissions and to talking about them next week.
And everybody else, without artistic inclination, please tune in and help us decide who our
cover will be.
You'll be able to judge people.
It'll be fun.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
