So, after having been an option to vote for for three episodes now, I think it's finally Mystique time.
Yeah, I kept putting Mystique as an option to vote for because she's one of my favorite X-Men characters,
so I figured she had to win sooner or later.
So, through various iterations and some wild costume changes, what makes Mystique Mystique?
Where other X-Men villains exhibit more traditionally masculine bad guy traits, anger, arrogance,
and from a power standpoint, they tended to be more strength-focused or exerting control over stuff-focused,
Mystique exhibits a roster of historically feminine evils, and her entire run with the X-Men and their periphery
when she's not being an outright villain includes being a double agent, joining the X-Men,
betraying the X-Men, and using her sexuality as a weapon a lot.
Being duplicitous as a feminine archetype is as old as the written word.
Many Western mythologies feature feminine figures that presents themselves as one thing,
usually to lure men into some false sense of security, only to eventually spell their doom.
The Sirens lured sailors to their deaths, Delilah seduced and then metaphorically castrated Samson,
and Mystique's power is to present herself as one thing while always having a secret ulterior motive.
Female science fiction characters written in the 1970s by male writers were an interesting bag,
because there was a lot of anxiety about this whole nascent women's lib thing.
Even her name Mystique harkens to Mystique comma The Feminine,
a book which completely changed the way American women saw themselves.
So it's fitting that she first appears in Ms. Marvel's original series,
as she is the embodiment of the 70s Wonder Woman you've come a long way baby attitude.
And all of this background, to be honest, is what allows her to be interesting.
Mystique is all of these fear of female sexuality archetypes packaged into one character,
who still manages to be one of the most interesting and textured and nuanced of all the X-Men characters.
And like most ex-villains, she's only, you know, sometimes a villain.
She joins the X-Men, then unjoins them and tries to seduce her daughter's boyfriend
so she can break them up and set Rogue up with someone else.
You know, the ush.
She eventually betrays the X-Men, of course, but only sort of.
And then eventually gets killed, but don't worry, she gets better.
At one point, she's even Professor X's indentured servant in her unlimited series,
called Mystique, written by Brian K. Vaughan, which is kind of James Bond inspired,
and yep, once again, she's a double agent.
So because this always needs to be pointed out, apparently,
having a character's basis in misogynist archetypes as old as time is not necessarily a bad thing,
as long as those archetypes don't go unexamined.
But it is a thing.
In X-Men, the animated series, Mystique gets pretty much all the major character beats
we'd already seen in the comics up to that point.
I swore one day I'd get you back.
Today is that day, my daughter.
Excluding actually joining the X-Men that happened later.
She pals around with pretty much all the big bads and ends up being used as a puppet a lot.
He wants to destroy everything!
I had to help him!
He would have killed me!
He has a secret command center.
What an interesting line read.
Okay, now say it like you don't know what words mean.
Buried under Stonehenge in England.
But her big episodes center around, of course, Rogue and Nightcrawler,
and even Graydon Creed gets a name drop,
although the being everyone's mother thing is handled a lot less deftly in the cartoon.
She's Nightcrawler's mother!
And Creed's mother, too!
And Beasts!
And the Professors!
And Colin Firth's!
And Optimus Pr-
Okay, you get the idea.
You know, people like you are the reason I was afraid to go to school as a child.
But then came the movies, and here she's Magneto's right-hand acrobat spy.
A slight departure from the comics, as Mystique rarely has anything to do with Magneto,
aside from reforming the Brotherhood of Evil Mutants.
But we gotta consolidate so in adaptations they're almost always working together.
And honestly, I think Rebecca Romijn doesn't get enough credit for being such a great physical actor.
Mystique has, like, two lines in this movie, and one of them is-
But you know so much about her just by the way she moves, her expressions.
Can you shut it down from here?
No.
She is alien, and the alien-ness is coded villainy,
but her motivations are clear and sympathetic,
and you can tell it took her a long while to get to that point.
Also, unlike in first class, the relationship between Magneto and Mystique is
all subtext.
They share laughs sometimes.
When will these people learn how to fly?
They seem to be friends, but really they're more political allies.
Their relationship doesn't have any sexual overtones,
but this is probably because Magneto is gay.
And Charles is gay.
What are you doing here?
Why do you ask questions to which you already know the answers?
And they are bitter exes.
You're sneaking around in here, Charles.
Whatever are you looking for?
And Mystique is over here like,
my name's Paul, this is between y'all.
Coinciding with the release of the first movie
came another animated series called X-Men Evolution,
which set itself apart from the earlier animated series
by making it more of a high school drama
and having most of the characters be high school age,
aside from a smattering of minter figures.
But for some reason, the kids who go to Xavier's school
also go to the local public high school
where Mystique is moonlighting-
daylighting?
As principal Darkholm.
Principal Dark-
You're Mystique?
Something Professor Xavier neglected to tell you.
And Xavier knows about this, but doesn't tell anyone?
Again, Mystique is working with Magneto,
who did some horrible thing to Nightcrawler
at some point in history.
Monster! What have you done to him?
We get to the Who's Your Mama episodes pretty early on,
first with Nightcrawler-
Um, no!
And then with Rogue.
I adopted you when you were four.
No!
Search the memories.
You are my daughter.
Destiny is here in this version as Mystique's best friend,
and she helped raise Rogue, who, once again,
does not remember being raised by Mystique in this version.
This was not a thing in the comics, by the way.
So at this point, Mystique the toxic mother figure
was a popular route for her character.
But I only posed as your friend so I could be near you.
Which is, of course, interesting and gives her a good source of conflict.
It's just too bad it didn't really go anywhere.
You want another beer?
Ah, here we are again with the using sexuality as a means to dupe men.
Velcro.
Nice.
In X-Men 2, after discovering some integral plot stuff,
she helps Magneto escape from prison,
and then they help the X-Men for a while before their sudden but inevitable betrayal.
It's kind of hinted in the first movie that she gets the hots for Wolverine when she fights him.
You know, some ladies are into that.
No one's ever left a scar quite like you.
She does want to nail Wolverine at one point,
seemingly for no reason other than she wants to get her some.
But this scene does give us one of the more
unintentionally hilarious moments in the whole franchise.
Oh yeah, that's what I want.
I likes me that Brian Cox.
She also gives us the most concise summation of the whole X-Men universe conflict,
and really any oppressed minority conflict.
Then why not stay in disguise all the time?
You know, look like everyone else.
Because we shouldn't have to.
You can't argue with that.
And really, that's all we need to know.
In fairness, not one character goes unfucked in X-Men 3,
so I won't say Mystique gets the shaft in an exceptional sense,
because every character in this movie does, but...
Braven, I asked you a question.
I don't answer to my slave name.
Is there anything unawful about this movie?
This moment.
This moment isn't terrible.
And that's it.
And no, the most obvious casting choice in history does not make this movie good,
really, that just makes it more of a tragic waste.
X-Men 3 combines two storylines,
the cure for mutation storyline and the Dark Phoenix storyline.
Two plots that have f*** all to do with each other,
and it's done about as clumsily as one can imagine.
Fairly early on in the movie, she's been caught by the cure people,
so Magneto goes to all this trouble to save her,
and then she takes a bullet for Magneto and gets depowered.
So now she's human, and Magneto's like,
Bye, Felicia.
I'm sorry, my dear.
You're not one of us anymore.
So how'd she react to this?
Yep, woman scorned.
Hell hath no fury like a woman scorned.
Like, those are literally the words that they use in the movie.
Yeah, forget her militant mutant supremacy beliefs,
one guy screws her over and she's ready to throw all of mutantkind under the bus.
Basically off-screen.
Like, if there's one feminine archetype Mystique didn't get, it was woman scorned,
but now we can check that one off, too.
Like, this has got to be pretty traumatic for her, right?
Might be interesting to see her, like, wrestle with this new identity.
She gave us everything we wanted and more.
You know.
Carmen Electra plays a Mystique parody in epic movie, which...
You know, I think you could probably call the nadir of that franchise.
I like a lot of junk in the trunk.
Kinky.
Yeah.
Like a fat blue Britney Spears.
You know what's funny?
Fat.
Come here!
This so warrants existing.
Let's make this interesting.
Compared to shows in the 90s where you can pretty much jump on at any point
and not really have missed anything, Wolverine and the X-Men has more of a grown-up 2000s
bent with a season-long storyline.
It's more of a mini-series.
Think about this show as it's an ensemble piece to a point that's almost frustrating.
Everyone gets an episode or two, but besides Wolverine,
no one gets any real character development over any length of time
because there's just so damn many characters.
One way both Evolution and the original animated series were stronger.
Anyway, once again, she has a past with Wolverine because everyone does.
You really don't remember me, Logan?
Because I remember you.
And instead of her relationship with Rogue and Nightcrawler,
that's the one they decide to play up.
The man who sacrificed himself so I could get away.
He's gone.
She was also in an episode of the Superhero Squad show.
This one I only feel really merits mentioning because she's voiced by Lena Headey.
Your plan is a complete success, Dr. Doom.
The path to the fractals is clear.
You know.
When you play the Game of Thrones, you win or you die.
Finally, let's look at Mystique as played by Jennifer Lawrence,
who is, aside from having the same makeup, functionally a completely different character
from the one we saw in the first three movies.
First two movies.
Like, I'm not even really gonna try and parse why they decided to go this route with Mystique,
and I don't think it really works until we get today's a future pass,
but here's what we got.
It's kind of like Star Trek, where I guess we've got two diverging timelines now
with mildly differing origins,
or the original got retconned altogether,
which is a bummer because that means X2 didn't happen,
but on the plus side, that means The Last Stand didn't happen either.
Then God help us.
Well, either way, The Last Stand got double retconned,
as even in the dystopian future, everything that happened in The Last Stand
just completely goes ignored.
Okay, but here's where I don't buy that First Class is supposed to be an honest-to-God prequel
instead of an alternate universe.
Will you read to me?
Can't. I have my thesis coming up. I have to study.
Fine, read that. Your thesis always tells me right off.
We never get any kind of indication that Professor X and Mystique
have any kind of history at all in the first three,
let alone that they grew up together and she was secretly in love with him,
but he was all like,
ew, my sister slash maybe there's some underlying internalized mutantism,
mis-mutanty, mutant Haiti.
Would you date me?
Of course I would.
And a young man would be lucky to have you. You're stunning.
Looking like this.
What?
Anyway, they grew up together and she's kind of bitter
because Xavier doesn't want her in her natural form,
you know, in the biblical sense.
Mutant and proud.
And then Beast doesn't either for his own self-Haiti reasons.
My feet, in your natural blue form,
never be deemed beautiful.
You look beautiful now.
Damn, that's cold, Beast.
But hey, Magneto thinks she's hot.
You're an exquisite creature, Raven.
Yeah.
All your life, the world has tried to tame you.
It's time for you to be free.
And that's why she joins Magneto.
Anyway, it's not as simple as Magneto wants to bum buglies with her
and that's why she defects,
and there is something powerful to her wanting to be accepted for who she is,
and that being why she chooses Magneto's side,
but it definitely has this boys don't think I'm pretty undertone.
Would you date me?
Yeah, I'm not a big fan of first class.
Fortunately, then came Days of Future Past,
by and large considered the other good one,
and here's where Mystique's character veering off into a totally different direction
becomes more concrete,
and this, I think, is largely actress-oriented.
Could you pass me my robe?
I think first class is meant to show young Mystique as literally young and naive,
and she'll grow into that quiet, solemn, confident Rebecca Romijn,
but in Days of Future Past, she's not really made any progress in that direction,
and that, in no small part, is because this Mystique is more Katniss than, well, Mystique.
The screenwriters also kind of came to see Mystique
as the sort of cross-pollination between Erik and Charles' respective philosophies,
which is why this version ends up being defined more by internal conflict
than by straight-up mutant rights.
Unlike the confident, quietly angry ideologue in the first three movies,
this Mystique is wracked with conflict,
and unlike the Romijn version, who doesn't flinch at violence,
she seems uncomfortable with the idea of killing.
All your life, the world has tried to tame you.
There's always been an undercurrent in the X-Men movies
about Professor X trying to control the women in his life,
handled with profound clumsiness in the last stand.
Days of Future Past makes this a rather overt theme,
with the main plot centering around Wolverine going back in time
to try and prevent Mystique from assassinating Peter Dinklage,
and thereby eventually preventing the robo-apocalypse.
So the story is ultimately resolved when X accepts that, no, he cannot control her,
but instead appealing to her better nature.
I've been trying to control you ever since the day we met.
And look what that's got us.
Which is funny because in the comics,
there's a scene where she makes fun of Forge for doing the exact same thing.
New Mystique's arc comes to its logical end in Apocalypse with her joining the X-Men.
She is not a mutant terrorist, nor is she a killer, so this was kind of inevitable.
Because of her actions at the end of Days of Future Past,
she has by Apocalypse become a hero to mutants all over.
A figure of both power and peace, and she is uncomfortable with this
and decides not to live in her blue form
because Jennifer Lawrence did not want to sit in the makeup chair anymore.
I mean because she didn't want attention.
Seriously, Jennifer Lawrence is so checked out in this movie,
they may have well have just filmed a literal phone.
Although her getting choked by Apocalypse did feature heavily in the marketing of this movie.
So that was a thing.
But anyway, Apocalypse Mystique is a far cry from this Mystique.
Not that that's a bad thing.
Honestly, if there is a character that can handle an increasingly wide swath of character traits,
it's Mystique.
And it's interesting to think that a somewhat minor character was in the running
to eventually get her own Wolverine-style, probably not very good X-Men spin-off
if certain actresses weren't so eager to get out of their contracts and not be painted blue anymore.
But I think it also speaks to how there is more of a demand for complex femme fatales nowadays.
That's why we've got sympathetic, maleficent Elsa, the misunderstood ice queen,
the wicked witch was an animal lover the whole time,
and Mystique, once such a confident hard-ass, is now wracked with conflict and insecurity.
But I think it works either way.
We don't need her to necessarily choose.
She is, after all, a shapeshifter.
Because we shouldn't have to.
And thank you for watching.
Thank you very much to patrons on Patreon.
I'm going to do a vote again next month.
But the next couple episodes, executive decision.
Because it's my turn again.
Because I can.
And I'm in a mood.
See you next time.
