Hello internet, I asked for questions and boy did you deliver with more than 7,000 so
let's get started.
If you could have 30 of the greatest minds work for 30 years what would you have them
work on?
Immortality.
Aging is a degenerative fatal disease of the genes in the same way Parkinson's is.
We're trying to cure Parkinson's with gene therapy along with leukemia, multiple melanoma
and others.
Why not aging?
Well because most people think of getting old and dying as a beautiful part of the life
cycle.
It isn't.
With 30 years of genius we could grasp control of our genetics and gain eternity.
Since you're pro immortality how would you solve overpopulation?
I'm not sold on overpopulation as a problem, birth rates have been going nothing but down
and until we build that Dyson sphere we aren't anywhere near the carrying capacity of the
solar system.
And immortality is exactly the sort of thing that makes crazy long term sustainability
projects possible.
First date ideas?
Scary experiences increase the probability of bonding.
This explains horror movies.
If you want the date to go well, do them.
If you don't, don't.
Why did you move to the UK?
I'm sure I've answered this before but everyone keeps asking so here's the whole story in
one place.
I grew up in the Empire State starting in the suburbs which I didn't like that much
then went to college in the wilds of Upstate which I liked better.
But it wasn't for me forever so next stop Big City.
New York was the obvious choice but because I was raised in its shadow New York felt a
bit like a step backward in life.
I discovered around this time I had Irish dual citizenship through a series of random
events which opened up the EU and her largest city London.
I knew if I didn't live abroad while still free of life's anchors I never would which
made it all the more reason to go.
I applied to an economics masters program in London, was accepted and went and stayed
for more than a decade.
It turned out great.
When you're leaving school try the adventurous path.
You can always fall back on the known later.
Destin and Brady are simultaneously bitten by venomous snakes.
You have one vial of anti-venom.
Who do you save and why?
Sounds like we're in a dangerous place.
Sounds like I need to keep that anti-venom while I go get help.
As you co-host two podcasts what is it about podcasts that appeals to you?
So I do have two podcasts that I'm putting on the screen now that you should totally
click and go listen to.
YouTube is how I spend most of my work energy despite what you might think from the CGP
Grey Reddit posts but podcasts allow me to with fewer of my hours make lots of hours
of stuff for other people to enjoy.
Ostensibly I'm doing this Q&A because I hit 2 million subscribers but I'm way more impressed
that these short videos according to YouTube have engaged more than a millennia of human
attention.
At least I was impressed until I did some back of the envelope calculations and realized
that the podcast has eaten up three millennia of human attention.
Which makes the time return on my time for podcasting astounding.
So the bottom line is that these projects are rewarding in different ways.
Have you clicked yet?
Go click.
Seriously do it right now.
I'd love to see this number get even bigger.
Do you move your hands while recording?
Of course.
Thoughts on standardized testing?
Standardized tests measure how good you are at school.
Same with your report card.
They don't measure your understanding and once you accept that they're easier to deal
with.
What do you miss most from the early days of the internet?
Modem sounds.
Correct order to view the Star Wars films?
4, 5, 6, 7.
What do you consider success in life?
I measure success by what percent of my time I have control over.
Reaching 100% isn't possible but on average I've been getting closer.
If this is your goal too, beware the money trap.
I've always preferred jobs that earned less if they gave me more time.
Which didn't pay off in the short term but did in the long term.
The holidays are like 80% of the reason I went into teaching.
Any advice for future teachers?
Watch The Dog Whisperer.
I am deadly serious about this.
It's also my advice for new parents.
What do you consider the biggest threat to humanity?
Last Q&A video I mentioned opinions and how to change them.
The hardest changes are the ones where you're invested in the idea.
And I've been a techno-optimist 100% all of my life.
But this book put a real asterisk on that in a way that I didn't want.
And now artificial intelligence is on my near-term threat list in a deeply unwelcome way.
But it would be self-delusional to ignore a convincing argument because I don't want
it to be true.
You can watch more discussion on Hello Internet if you click here.
Techno-optimists beware.
If you couldn't live in the UK anymore where would you move?
In my ideal life I would live in many different places for a year or two at a time but that's
not really practical now.
If I had to pick a new city at this very moment it would be Amsterdam.
Why are you such a fan of the Dutch?
Sincerely a tulip growing windmill building, hogus log eating, container ship moving, ocean
conquering guy.
Answered your own question there.
Regarding humans need not apply, what do you think we should do to prepare ourselves for
mass unemployment?
I don't know.
The kind of automation I worry about is the same kind that creates Star Trek abundance.
The transition from here to there worries me and solutions that would work in this world
might not work in the in-between.
Also I am open to the idea that I may be wrong about automation and many have good arguments
as to why.
Technology decreasing jobs goes against all the data from all the history of all the world's
economies.
But I think we'll find out sooner than most people expect.
Teslas are quasi-automated already and automation of transport is my prediction for the biggest
most visible impact on employment.
Even pizza companies are getting into the auto business.
Which games have you been playing recently?
Way too much Factorio.
Way too much.
Also Grimworld and much to my own surprise American Truck Simulator.
So relaxing.
I cannot wait for them to add the rest of the states and Canada.
Please can we see your battle station?
It used to look like this but I've just set up a brand new one and it looks like this.
Would you recommend going to university?
Yeah maybe.
Devil's in the details though.
At one extreme end if you want to take out tens of thousands of dollars in loans to pursue
a degree in something that ends in studies you'd be better off taking that money and
starting a restaurant.
Don't get me wrong starting a restaurant is a terrible idea but it's a better terrible
idea.
On the other end if you live in a country that pays for college and you're getting a
degree in a high paying field that's easy to recommend.
But between those extremes is where difficult decisions lie.
Personally I went to college and took out a loan and got a degree close to this end
of the spectrum but I only felt comfortable doing that because I was also getting a degree
on this end of the spectrum.
Shock surprise this one paid my bills and this one was a nice hobby.
What's a piece of advice you would give to people that are just getting out of college?
Your life is in your hands alone now.
This is the best and worst thing about adulthood.
Would you have eye surgery to get rid of your glasses?
Jesus Christ man have you ever seen eye surgery?
You're awake.
It's your eyes.
I'll consider eye surgery only when I can replace them fully.
Is a hot dog a sandwich?
No obviously not.
Uh maybe?
Which way is the most effective method of car transport?
Driving on the left or the right?
It doesn't matter only agreement matters.
What is your country in your mind?
Do you consider yourself American or British?
To live abroad is to be constantly reminded of outsider status so I don't feel remotely
British but having lived in the UK for the whole of my adult life however now when I
go back to America it feels like Canada.
Familiar yet foreign?
So I'm a bit homeless but it doesn't matter because people overvalue national identities
anyway.
In the end I feel like someone who grew up in America and is just a person in the world.
If you could teach someone something in a minute or less that would benefit them for
the rest of their life what would it be?
Here's a super fast way to iron your clothes.
Don't bother.
Buy clothes that don't need ironing.
I've just saved you hundreds of hours of your life you're welcome.
Do you have a New Year's resolution?
If so what?
I think New Year's resolutions are dumb and designed to fail.
I mean how many of you have already totally abandoned your New Year's resolutions?
But I do like themes for the year.
This is my year of less.
You'll need to go to Cortex for a full explanation because it's a bit complicated and not what
it sounds like and I'm still kind of working on it.
What's your handwriting like?
Messy and to the surprise of many, cursive.
How do you handle stress?
Poorly.
My stress management technique is to remove the source.
I'd rather eliminate the problem than get better at dealing with it.
Top five country flags.
It's hard to separate my thoughts on national flags from the countries themselves.
Scrolling through the list I find myself drawn to the Canadian flag, the UK, Germany and
Nordic flags but it's because I like those places.
That said I'm also a sucker for a strong design in the center like Barbados and Kenya.
And most national flags are pretty good if a little safe.
They're no abomination like the state flags.
It's harder to pick the top out of a bunch of mostly good designs as opposed to picking
the best out of a pile of poo.
What's the best book you read last year?
I didn't read as many as I would have liked but I'm going to pick So You've Been Publicly
Shamed as my book of the year.
If I designed a school curriculum it would be required reading for the living on the
internet module.
How long did it take you to sort through these questions?
I divide my working time into units.
This unit is 40 minutes long and I spent 5 units over a couple of days looking at the
most upvoted questions and all of the questions in random order and selecting the ones that
interested me.
Then many, many more units writing various drafts.
This script started at a 5,000 boring messy words and got cut to 2,000 hopefully more
interesting words.
And thank you to everyone who submitted questions.
I'm aware that I only got to half a percent of them so we'll have to do this again sometime.
