Uh, Ion Hisilius has come out against this and says, no, that's not right.
In fact, liberal Western values are in fact correct when they say that it is wrong to
cut, to mutilate little girls' genitals without anesthesia.
That is wrong.
We can put our foot down.
It doesn't matter what culture you come from.
It doesn't matter what I personally believe about it.
Meet Dillentine Two, a 9-11 truther.
Dillentine Two is going to try and answer some questions.
Hi, Dillentine.
Excuse me.
Allow me to readjust my antennae.
Oh no, my aluminum foil.
I have to protect my brain against the pulsars.
At this point in the interview, the satellite connection unexpectedly failed.
Dillentine Two was later to rely on this as evidence of a conspiracy, although he was
uncertain as to what conspiracy.
In any event, we pick it up a few minutes later.
Oh my God.
Dillentine Two, how long did it take for the Twin Towers to collapse?
9-11 was an inside job.
Yes, but how long did it take for them to collapse?
Nine seconds.
OK, but have you seen the footage that clearly shows that they don't fall in that time?
They fell at free-fall speed.
But nine seconds is free-fall speed.
Nearly free-fall speed.
Nearly.
Well, what is nearly free-fall speed?
9-11 was an inside job.
9-11 was an inside job.
Oh God, let's move on.
OK, so what is your best piece of evidence to support your theory?
9-11 was an inside job.
Yes, I think we've got that message.
But what is your...
World Trade Center Seven.
What about it?
No steel structure has ever collapsed through fire.
Well, that's simply not true, is it?
Operation Northwood, Bay of Pigs, Pearl Harbor.
What? Can you explain?
9-11 was an inside job.
Oh God.
So what about the Pentagon?
The hole's too small.
I said the hole's too small.
The hole is too small.
What on earth are you talking about?
How big was the hole?
17 feet, diametrically speaking.
And are you sure about that?
Look, I don't want your mercury-laden, cancer-laden photograph.
Yeah, enough, enough.
Thanks for your help, Delantine, to...
9-11!
Shut up.
We can't just let him upload it.
Because, I mean, you know, it's like there's no hotline or anything that can do anything about this.
I mean, the police wouldn't come.
They wouldn't understand the implications and the dangers of posting a video like that.
They wouldn't understand that it's dangerous.
We don't want to alarm him. I mean, he's on Skype.
He can hear everything we're saying.
Nick, you doing alright? Yeah?
You doing alright, hey?
Niz? Can you hear us?
Yeah.
Why are you talking to me?
I'm just a hot dog.
No.
No one even likes hot dogs.
