Now I know what you all want. You want me to cut to a shot of David Serrini saying something stupid.
So yes, white genocide is a thing that's going on right now.
And if you haven't noticed it yet, it's because you haven't opened your eyes.
No, I haven't!
I just swallowed my gum.
But that actually wouldn't be fair, because he didn't do a video review of The Force Awakens.
Instead, he wrote one for his website.
A website that shills for, no joke, testosterone cream.
The one thing David Serrini definitely does understand is his core demographic.
Obviously, this is a move I agree with. Not the cream, the written review, since
writing something ahead of time gives you a chance to think more about what you're saying,
so you're not just blurting out nonsense.
Although even with a script, not everyone can get that right.
The pre-sexual fantasies of a broken boy.
Oh god, this is gonna be great.
Listen up, white man. JJ Abrams hates you.
He relishes the thought of your extinction as he looks forward to a multi-culti-matriarchy
where instead of studying math and sciences, everyone sits around discussing their feelings.
Why specifically is it JJ Abrams who hates me?
You know, he co-wrote the script, along with returning Star Wars writer Lawrence Kasdan
and Michael Arndt.
Does that mean that the writing is fine, but the direction of the film specifically hates white men?
Paying money to see his film is the equivalent of auto-gastration.
It's literally the same thing as cutting off your balls.
So that's what all the cream is for.
He also refers to Finn as Mace Dindu, and apparently had to Google the name
of one of the main characters in a film he's analysing.
Davis is part of the proud, several-month-old tradition in the men's rights movement
where you pretend to be fucking stupid and incapable of remembering people's names for attention.
When, um, when the girl meets the black dude, the co-main star of the movie.
This is because looking like you don't know anything about what you're talking about
only makes your review more convincing.
Matt Zoller-Zeitz is far too informed.
I prefer it when critics forget large portions of the film.
Take the red pill, like in The Matrix.
Remember the scene where the, uh, the, the, the black guy offers John Matrix the pills?
Did I mention that all lives matter?
Towards the end, the only reason he finally nuts up and fights not-Darth Vader
is because he got the scent feminist Skywalker's white pussy into his nose.
What? Hey, hang on.
They must have cut that part out for the version screened in the UK.
I don't remember anything like that.
At this point in his review, I was thinking,
I'm pleasantly surprised Davis is making genuine effort to actually talk about the content of the film
to a certain degree and not spew too much of a neo-reactionary manifesto.
But then I scrolled down...
Feminist Skywalker, on the other hand, came out of the womb already an expert on everything.
The blame for this Star War can be assigned entirely to his dick.
This entire film is metaphorical for affirmative action.
Women in today's society graduate high school endowed with physical female hiring quotas,
failed at school, broke the law, gave birth to a bastard.
Meanwhile, the boys who were raised beside her have been deliberately held back.
They are presumed rapists from birth.
That civilization is a result of men's labor.
Feminists have never, and will never, accomplish anything of worth
because they reject the masculine principle.
The women of the greatest accomplishments are those who submitted.
The women who believed...
Oh my god.
Women bleed on the birthing bed while men bleed on the battlefield.
That is the nature of the species man.
It is women who have trouble keeping it in their pants,
and yet we're supposed to believe that men are the ones who think with their little heads.
This world of gender fluidity sells itself as freedom, but it is anything but.
You'd think that with the advantage of writing the article in advance
and decades of having to think and breathe on Earth,
Davis would have been able to remind himself to stay on point,
but like in his videos about Star Trek and feminism, and also maybe slightly Marxists,
he's just using a Star Wars review as an excuse to talk about how society is all thanks to men.
Not men like him, obviously.
I'm pretty sure George Washington never farted and shitted all over the social media
He even revels in not knowing the main characters' names.
So, I guess if you're into purposeful ignorance, this is the review for you.
For everyone else, though, it's garbage.
Nilpoise. Nil...po...po...uh...po...
Keimpokta!
Interestingly enough, the name Keimpokta is a name that's been around for a long time.
It's a name that's been around for a long time, but it's not a name that's been around for a long time.
It's a name that's been around for a long time, but it's not a name that's been around for a long time.
Keimpokta!
Interestingly enough, masculinity-praising website Return of Kings,
authors of such amazing articles as How Not to Get Raped,
and Wow! They Cast a Black Woman to Play Hermione in a Harry Potter Play,
have written an article about how terrible this film is.
I bet it's great.
Let's read it and see how reasonable it is.
Right after I've had a quick snack.
Oh, it's horrid. It's actually just terrible.
And that's not even a joke.
I'm gonna go wash my mouth.
Oh, uh, spoilers, it's literally all the same
weak-ass criticisms we've seen before.
Sorry.
I mean, Rey beat an idiot kid with a homemade lightsaber,
and Luke lost to the fucking Chosen One, the greatest Jedi of all time,
so that comparison's totally reasonable, right?
Okay, it's a dumb article, you get the point.
But even better, they then published another one,
detailing how their reporting cost Star Wars $4.2 million.
What an astounding figure.
I mean, Disney wipes their fucking ass with million-dollar bills, but still.
How did they arrive at that amazing figure, you ask?
Easy!
They held a poll of their readers,
asking if their reporting affected their decision to see the film,
took the amount of users visiting their site in a month,
figured out how much that would be in film tickets,
and divided that by the people who said yes.
Just do the math!
Let's look at that poll again.
How many people took part?
Um, any statistician worth their salt
will tell you that a poll of 565 people
will not accurately reflect the opinions of 900,000 users.
Not even unique users, by the way,
so a bunch of these users will just be the same people
accessing the site at different times of day,
and a bunch of them would have been, for example, me,
laughing at these fucking hilarious articles,
with my ad blocker turned on, by the way.
Also, I couldn't help but notice that the question isn't
did our reporting make you not see it?
It just said did it affect your decision to see it,
which doesn't really mean anything.
Seeing the idiots on Return O' Kings
rant about how a black stormtrooper is ruining Star Wars
because something-something Ayn Rand white genocide
did affect my decision, too. It made me want to see it more.
Also, if you think Trey J. Abrams is a good enough director
to single-handedly bring about the end of white people with his stories,
you do realize you're paying him a compliment, right?
You really have to wonder why so many right-wing conservative types
have problems with The Force Awakens.
I'm beginning to think it's something to do with the black-clad fascists
who rant about degenerates and who try to commit genocide getting stopped.
Okay, I could literally talk about other people's opinions of Star Wars forever,
and in fact, I plan on arguing with people about Star Wars
for the rest of my natural life.
I like the prequels, and I will fight you!
But for now, let's finish up with this.
It's an image macro one of the 4chan-type sites came up with
detailing a shocking conspiracy.
The white female audience is conditioned to identify with the female
with her cuck staff shaped like a large black member
grasped at hand at all times.
They must be conditioned to become attracted to the black male lead.
This is a censored version, by the way.
The original was punctuated with loads of shots of white women
having a lovely time with black penises.
Whoever made this image was very, very afraid of a future
where white women don't pay attention to him,
but also had a lot of these images on hand ready to use.
I guess I'll have to compliment the anonymous author on their preparedness?
Let's go with that.
Who is the white male audience supposed to identify with?
Simple.
The little white cuck ball.
I thought this part of the image was from the censorship,
but it's actually in the original, too.
This is the fate of the white man in the West.
Okay, the worst thing is BB-8 is actually the only Star Wars character
I've ever wanted to cosplay.
It's working!
The feminists have got me!
Help!
Ha-ha-ha-ha!
It hurts to do that voice.
Oh, I'm not going to re-record that part.
Fuck you.
In conclusion, social justice warriors, or third-wave feminists,
or whatever buzzword you decide to call them this week,
are useless non-creatives who will never amount to anything
and just whine ineffectually about things they don't like.
And the only way to stop them is to whine about them
even more ineffectually, which will cause them to melt.
Now, when I first saw this image, I assumed it was a joke or a parody.
I mean, how ridiculous is it?
The assertion that there's a coded conspiracy to teach women
to find black people attractive and diminish the power of the white man.
But then I realized I've heard that somewhere before.
Remember this video?
Yeah, the one I showed you out of context at the beginning?
It's a video about cuckoldery and how Davis sees imagery of cuckoldery everywhere,
and this is somehow everyone else's fault but his.
Constantly streaming through advertisements, through public events,
are these images of cuckoldery.
The most obvious ones being, of course, the interracial cuckoldery.
But even ignoring that, you will find a lot of cuckold themes throughout the media.
It's being indoctrinated into our culture.
It would be rude of me not to explain what Davis meant by genocide,
so I thought I'd go back to it at the end.
In his opinion, the media's full of images designed to make it seem okay
for women to cheat on their lovers with non-white people
and thus destroy them by way of breeding them out.
And it's fully within the UN definition of genocide
to try and destroy a race of people through genetic dilution.
The media is teaching us to stop breeding properly.
The media's trying to kill white people.
He's deadly serious.
He invokes the UN definition of genocide.
Well, he misuses it, but he tries to invoke it.
Star Wars, for Davis, is just another head on a hydra
trying to destroy his beloved white people.
Davis is quick in his videos to assert that he's not racist,
that racism is just a buzzword thrown around to try and censor him,
and that he just likes white people a lot,
and calling black people by the n-word is actually a sign of mutual respect.
But in the comments of his review,
he makes the claim that predominantly black areas have more crime
not because of complicated social or economic factors,
but simply because blacks are less capable of being civilized, or something.
That's why I bothered to talk about the 4chan macro.
It's stupid, but it reflects the genuine beliefs
on display by the alternative right on the internet.
Davis is fun to laugh at.
I'm probably his biggest fan.
But eventually, if you start to really think about what he's saying,
and try to humor him by taking him seriously,
it stops being funny, and it starts being sad.
Davis is someone who clearly puts a lot of thought into what he professes,
and he might even have a modicum of actual education on some subjects.
Yet, what he comes up with, in all seriousness,
is completely indistinguishable from an image macro
that is itself almost impossible to discern from parody.
Davis got a nice bump in viewership, thanks to Gamergate,
a movement co-opted and manipulated from the start
by predominantly right-wing and libertarian ideologies for their own benefit,
but he's hemorrhaged most of them in the past year or so.
It's not difficult to see why.
Oddly enough, there's a film series that's above these petty politics.
It's called Star Wars. You might have heard of it.
In it, mankind just sort of...
is kind of nice to itself.
You know, it doesn't ever really come up
what gender or ethnicity a character is.
There's still murder, there's still death, there's still genocide,
but it's always for ideals or for class reasons.
We've managed to move beyond race as an issue at all,
and for a film series that's literally about war,
that's bizarrely utopian,
and I can't help but agree with that.
It's science fiction, it's basically fantasy,
but I think there's a good message there,
something that you can believe in.
Brothers, sisters,
beneath the sky, there is one family.
Nothing really divides us.
It's all an illusion clouding our judgment.
We are all one people,
and I don't think there's anything we can't achieve.
And I live for the day, that bright, shining day in the future,
when as one race, as one species,
we can kill those fucking space fish!
I'd like to say a very big thank you to all of my supporters on Patreon,
everyone you just saw before in the credits,
but an extra special thanks to Alexander Corbett and Heshy Lifeson.
I couldn't have done it without you.
Those Star Wars Pez dispensers were like 99 pence each on eBay.
It was a nightmare.
Luckily, I found a place that sold them local, and I stole them.
For those of you interested in patronizing me,
and helping me consume more than just coffee and apples,
I'll have you know that a $2 donation will give you access
to all the weird bonus stuff I cut out of videos for time,
and because I've decided it's a little bit too experimental.
I would genuinely appreciate any donation.
I haven't been able to afford new pajamas in like a decade.
This stuff's starting to tear.
I actually have to wear my normal clothes over this.
It won't come off anymore.
Anyway, thanks a lot to my patrons.
I really do need the money.
As you can tell, I have a lot of mouths to feed.
Ah! Jesus!
I need to cut your claws. That fucking hurts.
Ah!
I really regret trying to get the cat to pose with me in that shot.
He's looking himself in the corner now.
