Youtube Nomina-san, konnichiwa, atashiwa arisu, soshite, kochiwa moto na no, kawaine, atashi no mono da!
The mainstream media are now full of stories explaining the alt-right.
Even a Japanese newspaper interviewed me the other day about the Aruto Raito.
Aruto Raito nani?
Last month I made a video called Why White Nationalism is Wrong,
in which I argued that reverting multicultural societies to homogenous ones isn't feasible,
that the concept of whiteness is artificial and unstable, and that so-called white genocide is
a fiction.
In response to that video, some people accused me of stating the obvious, or expressed astonishment
that such a video was even necessary.
Other people said,
First and foremost, you are but a dog, and I am your master!
Oh jeez, I'm getting all hot under the corset.
What else we got here?
Hit it, dick!
Hitler was too moderate.
Hashtag gash yourself, it will do the rest of us a favor.
Typical Jewish humor.
Kill yourself, untermensch.
White Europe is the only possible Europe.
As an assumed gay transsexual, have fun when a pack of moderate islamists find you alone
at night.
I smell a cuck.
Cuck.
Cuck.
Cuck.
Cuck.
Maximum cuckoldry.
Yeah, cuck cuck cuck.
I got over 9000 of this type of comment.
I wonder where they all came from.
Fucking newgrounds!
Aren't these the same otaku shitweasels who harass women and ruin their lives for
criticizing video games on the internet?
Man, you'd have to be a genuinely deranged maniac to actually want to argue with these
people.
Hallo Leute.
In this video, we're going to talk about the 9th episode of the Nazi Nationalism.
Sorry, it's the costume.
So if you're a white nationalist who's thinking of calling me a cuck and a fag and
telling me to kill myself, I'm just going to assume that you've given up on all pretense
of rationality, and I will invite you to engage with some of my Nazi-punching comrades, and
you guys can all work this out the Homeric way, which is where this all seems to be headed
anyway.
But I hope it doesn't come to that, and people tell me I'm good at talking to the
far right.
I mean, there's a reason they call me the Nazi whisperer.
Come here, Fritz.
Sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk sk.
And the response to my white nationalist video wasn't all just cuck and keck.
There were also a lot of people making arguments, or at least the frail facsimile of arguments,
and arguments I can deal with.
I can make points against them.
I can make points contrary to them.
I can make points contra to tile eins, facts and values.
So I get some comments from nationalists presenting evidence that could, at least in theory, be
empirically verified or falsified.
For instance, the Muslims are pedophile raping terrorists theory, or the white genocide theory,
also known as ethnic displacement by savvy or white nationalists who know that white
genocide sounds like a crackpot notion, because it is.
Now in my first draft of this video, I went through and agonizingly debunked these claims,
arguing that the claims of an ongoing refugee rampage of rape and pillage throughout Germany
are unsubstantiated, that Sweden is in fact the rape reporting capital of the world, rather
than the rape capital as the far right claims, that the decline in white people as a percentage
in the total population of a country is not the same as a numerical decline in the white
population, that the birth rate among Muslim immigrants is rapidly declining and is likely
to decline even more in successive generations, and that the aforementioned points make the
whole ethnic displacement idea ridiculous, and that in general the factual information
of instant support of nationalism is almost entirely out of context statistics deceptively
cited by scaremongering goons in an effort to radicalize disillusioned young white men.
But I realized I was wasting my time.
For one thing, this debunking has already been done before, and better than I can do
it.
Seriously, go subscribe to Sean and Jen.
And if I focus on this specific peripheral stuff, the nationalists will just respond
saying that I didn't make an argument, that I don't have any arguments, that I didn't
make a single argument, that I didn't make any arguments, that I didn't make an argument,
that I didn't make a single argument, that I didn't make an argument, or that I don't
have any arguments.
Now, some of them are clearly just trolling me.
But I also wonder if they do really think that I'm ignoring the most important part
of their worldview, namely this idea that white people deserve their own homogenous
nations.
And if that's the most important idea to you guys, why don't we just get right down
to it instead of getting bogged down in pointless debates about facts and what is true.
Teilzweig.
Do white people deserve their own exclusive ethnostates?
So how do we argue for or against the idea that white people deserve their own ethnically
homogenous nations?
Well, it's not an empirical claim, so we can't support it or debunk it with evidence.
But when I look at the kinds of arguments that nationalists give, I see the same kind
of thing again and again, namely this idea that there's this great unfairness where everyone
gets to have their own ethnostate except for us.
You need to explain to whites why we can't have an ethnostate but Israel can.
What's wrong with wanting the immigration policy of Japan?
I'm proud to be Asian, said the Asian man.
I'm proud to be black, said the black man.
I'm proud to be white, said the racist.
Why do you hate white people?
I don't see your kind ever saying such things about other races.
Interesting.
Very interesting.
Now how do I respond to this?
Well, I'll begin by saying that the comparison between white nationalism and identity politics
causes like Black Lives Matter is spurious, because Black Lives Matter does not advocate
for the establishment of a homogenous black ethnostate where all other races are excluded.
And I condemn the ethnostate idea wherever it exists, including in Israel and Japan.
Hai.
Nien.
Hai.
Nien.
Hai.
Das ist vos.
Nani.
Shh.
Learn more Japanese vocabulary.
Hai.
Anyway, the idea that only white nations are multicultural or multiethnic is false.
Look at the demographics of China or India, and you'll see that both countries are populated
by a variety of ethnic groups.
In fact, if you look at the demographics of Peru, you'll find that the country is so diverse
that no single ethnic group comprises a majority of the population.
But here I am arguing with facts again, and white nationalism isn't about facts.
So what is it about?
Well, progressives may be thinking that it's about hate, and it kind of is, but based on
my experience immersed in white nationalist discourse online, I have to say that the more
predominant mood is fear.
And I don't just mean fear of Muslims or black people or other minority groups.
I mean a deep, existential fear of change and irrelevance and annihilation.
Behind all these memes and jokes, there's this kind of basic primordial dread of death
and nothingness.
Now let's take a look at a couple more comments to see what I mean.
Maybe that asteroid that brushed past Earth should have hit.
At least I wouldn't have to put up with trannies, gays, and sea Marxists wiping out my people.
Many of us are looking at our countries and thinking, well, if things keep going like
this in another 70 years, there will be no Germany.
There will be no France, no Sweden, no Portugal, no Greece, no Western world, and this feeling
changes everything.
If I have to be a Nazi to protect my race, my culture, and my country, then you bet your
ass I'll take that label with pride.
You never mentioned any tribal belief that white people had and basically associated
the speaking of English as proof that our culture is not dying.
What about the speaking of Old Norse or countless other languages that were molded together
due to this one-world government all people are equaling us?
The one-world government wiped out Norse.
So the tone that comes across in these comments is one of existential panic.
And funny though the idea is about one-world government bringing down Old Norse, it does
convey what the white nationalist hopes for as a solution to change and loss and oblivion.
Namely that if you could just freeze time at a given point in history, then you could
preserve an eternal civilization, a thousand year reich.
It's like this kind of Egyptian mummification urge, the idea that if we could just embalm
our own culture and protect it from the whims of time, that it could live forever.
But just like mummifying dead bodies for the afterlife, this is a delusion.
There's no way to stop cultures from changing.
It's always happened and it's always going to happen, whether because of immigration
or the internet or whatever.
Swedish culture is going to change, English culture is going to change, German culture
is going to change, but there's a big difference between death and metamorphosis and it takes
a lot more than a couple million immigrants to kill a culture.
So let's consider African American culture as a story of some of the most glorious cultural
perseverance in all world history.
During the transatlantic slave trade, Africans were ripped by force from their ancestral
homeland, shipped to a different continent, placed in literal shackles and sold as property.
Drums, which were the musical centerpiece of their communal life, were forbidden by
their white owners.
Their language was replaced, they were converted to a new religion, and their genetic makeup
was altered over generations of rape.
They were about as defeated as a culture can be, and yet, you can't stop a slave in the
field from singing.
Fast forward to the 20th century, and despite ongoing subjugation, black Americans ushered
in a century-long golden age of music and art that has spread across the world.
So don't tell me that a couple million immigrants mean the death of Europe.
It could literally be a thousand times worse, and European culture would still survive in
some form or another.
And I know my preceding argument won't actually convince people who think that American music
is degenerate.
But you know what?
I encourage you to actually acquaint yourself with the best of blues, jazz, soul, rock,
and hip-hop.
If you look, you'll find emotional depths there that can actually change you as a person.
And who knows?
Maybe it'll restore the part of your humanity that died when you decided that it was okay
to build razor wire fences in front of children fleeing for their lives.
But if you're going through some kind of identity crisis and you need to seek meaning in the
culture of your ancestors by intoning a few prayers to Odin now and then, you know what?
That's fine.
You're entitled to do that.
But you're not entitled to demand that an entire culture freeze in its tracks.
And I won't pretend that multi-ethnic society will always be easy, or that there won't be
conflict and setbacks.
There will be.
But if there's one lesson that America can teach Europe, it's that these things are surmountable.
It may be difficult in the short term, especially for countries that are just now having to
deal with significant ethnic diversity for the first time.
But in the long term, you know, it's honestly gonna be fine.
And I suppose to European nationalists, I am basically the worst case nightmare scenario
of what their grandkids could become.
I suppose I should be a little bit browner, but basically, I am what the alt-right is
afraid of.
I live in the most multicultural country in the world, and you know what?
My culture is not white culture.
It's American culture, underappreciated black muse included.
And that means that you can't tell me that white nationalism will protect my culture,
because my culture is half-black.
What I'm saying is, I am rock and roll.
They'll never even get me out on the floor In ten minutes I'll be late for the door
I like that old-time rock and roll Still like that old-time rock and roll
The kind of music just soothes the soul I reminisce about the days of old
With that old-time rock and roll
Hi!
