Now, scientists say that the earth is 5 billion years old and the Bible says it's 6,000 to
10,000 years old.
So this demonstration is going to prove a big point.
Here's some friendly advice for creationists.
Please before you do something like this and cause atheists to collapse into uncontrollable
laughter, please check with a scientist or a science major or perhaps a 7-year-old who's
just started learning science in elementary school and find out why whatever theory you've
dreamed up at the end of a spade doesn't work in the real world.
So you may wonder why digging a hole is going to help Frank here debunk 200 years of geology.
So let's fast forward.
As you're starting to see the clean soil come up.
Get on with it.
If you notice, you'll see the dirty soil that's on the top and below you start to see
the soil come clean.
If the earth is 5 billion years old, this dark mulch should be 10, 20, 30 feet thick.
It's not even a foot.
How is the earth 5 billion years old?
It's the biggest bullshit ever told to man.
Oh, that's it.
Right.
Well, where do I start?
Okay.
Let's start with what Frank calls dirty soil.
I think he's referring to topsoil or humus, which is where weathered rock is mixed with
organic material.
If the earth is 5 billion years old, this dark mulch should be 10, 20, 30 feet thick.
Okay.
That means that for whatever reason, Frank thinks topsoil accumulates at the rate on
average of one foot every 250 million years.
That would make this layer 250 million years old then, right, Frank?
According to your reckoning.
So although Frank thought he was trying to prove that the earth is just 6,500 years old,
his own math has tripped him up.
But it doesn't matter because topsoil doesn't accumulate like that anyway, at least in what
the rest of us call real life.
In real life, topsoil is by definition always going to be at the top because that's where
organic matter is mixing in with the soil.
Now it does vary in depth because it's always being eroded on higher slopes and accumulating
in alluvial plains and eventually dumped at sea.
As the soil gets eroded, new soil is being produced by weathering at the rock face.
When ice sheets extend across the higher latitudes, as they have done several times in the last
million years, the soil is scraped away completely.
It's replaced by new soil every time there's an interglacial.
Of course this constant weathering into new soil grinds mountains down, so when sea levels
rise and cover this eroded landscape with sediment, the old soil gets buried.
Over time it becomes fossilised.
We can see these so-called paleosoils in a place that the rest of us call the real world.
You can even see ancient worm casts and fossilised plant roots in these paleosoils.
So geologically speaking, soils aren't that old.
But the biggest problem I have with Frank's theory is the injuries we might sustain laughing
at a desperate creationist digging himself into a hole.
And Frank isn't the only culprit.
So this video is an appeal to creationists, please stop, you're killing us.
Over the centuries you've tortured, burned and massacred people who don't accept your
beliefs and I hope that in the 21st century this would have stopped, but no, I've been
getting messages from my subscribers who say they've been seriously hurt or incapacitated
while laughing at your creationist claims.
Rage Unchained, for example, laughed so much at Kent Hovind's claim about carbon dating
that his anal sphincter became detached.
Here's an appeal from a desperate Eorgorinkon with a dire prediction.
Sadly he passed away last month after watching another Ken Ham video.
The list of injuries because of your hilarious statements goes on and on.
An injured jaw, headaches, loss of bladder control, aching muscles.
A number of people even experienced spontaneous combustors nostrallis thanks to Richard Kent
and his dragon claim, including Jacob Paprotsky, who sent me this photo.
Doctors say he'll never again be able to breathe properly or bear children.
Facetious Badger was seriously injured when coffee spat out of his nose.
Now he's suing me for a replacement keyboard.
Does the agony never end?
Now I know what you're going to say, creationists.
It's my mocking, scoffing derision of the things you say that's funny, not you.
It's my fault that so many decent, honest atheists are splitting their sides, or worse,
dying of laughter.
But no, it's not me, it's you.
What you say is genuinely funny.
Now you may argue, well, atheism's pretty funny too, and creationists therefore face
a similar danger to their health.
I'm sorry, but if that was true, then you'd be able to make an amusing video out of something
atheists have said, or something that's accepted science.
But you can't.
Here, for example, is a Golden Crocoduck-nominated video that ought to be funny, because it's
called Atheism is Funny.
Well, let the hilarity begin.
You know, atheism is funny.
How funny is it?
Proponents of atheism laugh at us Christians for believing in the Bible, yet they themselves
completely ignore the fact that they take a fifth grader's science book as infallible
as well.
Hmm, anyone find that funny?
Okay, a creationist does.
The reason no one else is laughing is obvious, because atheists don't think a fifth grader's
science book is infallible.
I mean, by definition, no science book is infallible, because science isn't infallible.
Scientific knowledge is constantly being updated and corrected as new evidence comes along.
And the video gets sillier.
They also regard flesh and blood as infallible.
Here is just a small list of infallible atheists.
Number one, Richard Dawkins.
Richard Dawkins is infallible?
Even Richard Dawkins wouldn't claim he's infallible.
And if he did claim he was infallible, then he'd obviously be wrong.
And if he's wrong, then he can't be infallible.
I suppose that's funny.
Similarly, it's hard to see the joke in this attempt at humour by Ray, the Chuckle King,
Comfort.
Let's now join our correspondent live in the swamps of Gobble Epus.
This amazing animal looks like a duck, but it has the head of some sort of amphibian.
This is tremendously exciting.
Darwin would have been ecstatic.
It's a crocodile that has evolved into a duck, or perhaps a duck that has evolved into a
crocodile.
This almost cute little creature is so close, I could even reach out and touch it.
But as Comfort accepts in the same video, biologists don't believe this creationist
invention ever existed.
So where's the joke?
See, observable humour like this is about observing something that's real.
For example, Jerry Seinfeld made a joke wondering why skydivers wear crash helmets.
In regards to the skydiving, what is the point of the helmet in the skydiving?
Yeah, it's a funny observation because skydivers really do wear crash helmets.
If you'd made a joke about the fact that skydivers wear ballet shoes, you know, something
like what are they hoping to do a pirouette when they land, that wouldn't be funny because
obviously skydivers don't wear ballet shoes.
Get it?
Creationists, what makes your beliefs so debilitatingly funny is that you do believe your book is
infallible.
A lot of you do think there ought to be such a thing as a crocoduck in the theory of evolution.
So trying to apply these attributes to atheism or science only points to the fact that atheism
and science don't have any of these wacky beliefs.
That's what makes what we say so inherently unfunny.
To see if someone's managed to get a laugh out of what atheists actually believe and
what science really says, I had to turn, of course, to Conservopedia.
You may have something that sounds promisingly funny, Top 10 Telltale Signs You're On Your
Way To Being A Lonely Atheist Nerd.
So a warning, you may split your sides and experience incontinence reading what promises
to be a hilarious list.
Top 10 Telltale Signs You're On Your Way To Being A Lonely Atheist Nerd.
Number one, when you're at your girlfriend's house, you can't stop scowling at her mother's
picture of Jesus.
Please see the atheist and evolutionist helpline.
Ooh, tough crowd.
You own more pocket protectors than shirts.
Oh, come on, that was a bit funny.
You tell your girlfriend that she's merely the result of blind, random, natural forces
and there's nothing particularly special about her.
Of course, this lets her know that you're an insensitive liar and she starts crying.
Hmm.
Not so much funny as, well, a bit sad.
Number four, you spent countless hours arguing with your girlfriend on the true definition
of atheism and insist that you're not diluting the definition of atheism given in most encyclopedias
of philosophy.
Oh, someone thinks that's funny.
Wow.
Oh, it's only Ian Juby and he's just chuckling at one of his own atheist jokes.
So okay, let's take a look at that one.
Juby's been reading from a science website explaining a paper about why men are hairier
than women.
The researchers did experiments showing that ectoparasites are more easily detected because
a fine covering of hair makes it more difficult for the parasites to get to exposed skin.
And that means they take longer to crawl around and will be more easily detected.
The conclusion is that hairier men will have fewer parasites and therefore be healthier.
Now there is such a thing as sexual selection, which was actually an old Darwinist idea,
that women, as most men know, are very picky about who they have sex with.
And naturally they go for men who are healthier and more likely to produce healthy offspring.
Or as the website puts it,
Not surprisingly, men were better at detecting bedbugs on the unshaved arm due to having
thicker and longer hair than women.
As to why men are generally hairier looking than women, the researchers suggest it might
be due to something as simple as women preferring men with fewer parasites on them, which would
imply more hair.
Quite interesting, you would have thought, and not particularly funny.
But here's Ian Juby's take on it.
As to why men are generally hairier looking than women, the researchers suggest it might
be due to something as simple as women preferring men with fewer parasites on them, which would
imply more hair.
Wow.
OK Ian, here's the problem.
You can't make something funny just by giggling as you read it, because it mentions body hair,
sex and armpits, unless you're in fifth grade.
You actually get much more of a laugh when you're trying to be serious.
Let's say the sun is orbiting around the earth, then it's going to, over time, it's going
to get out of balance, and it's going to switch places.
But apparently, lay the eggs on the run.
Ian, that's incredible.
But it's this kind of harmful hilarity I'm trying to stop, for the sake of my subscribers.
Finally, onto cartoons, which aren't that much better.
Here's another joke from Conservopedia.
Waitress says, you want proof and evidence that atheism is true?
Nobody has ever asked for that at our atheist restaurant before.
If you're seeking a full course meal of proof and evidence, I suggest going to the Christian
restaurant down the street.
Look, I sympathise.
It's hard to make atheism or scientific facts funny.
Now I know what you're going to say.
But humour is subjective.
I found that cartoon funny, and when Juby giggled at hairy armpits, I cracked up.
You're sincerely Ken Ham.
Oop, what a giveaway.
No, this is more than subjective.
When I searched the term creationist comedian on YouTube, I couldn't find a single one.
There are Christian comedians, but their jokes are all directed at funny things that happen
in churches.
Let's face it, evolution isn't inherently funny, because it just involves organisms
changing slowly over time, through a mechanism we basically understand, and even creationists
accept that they change over time.
Atheists don't have talking snakes, or people springing to life out of lumps of clay, or
ribs, or living inside whales, or weird doctrines that we're forced to follow.
Living women must be shunned, but that, if nothing else, is proof of God's wisdom.
This survey of American beliefs showed that Americans, at a rate of between 48 and 51%,
don't believe in evolution, which is, like, half.
And on top of that 50-odd percent, a further 38 to 40% of Americans believe that biological
evolution has occurred, but believe that it was initiated by, and has since been kind
of administered by, God, leaving a very small percentage of Americans who are right.
It's not my theory.
I've done material about evolution before, and in Australia and in Britain it barely
raises an eyebrow.
It's just worth a chuckle.
But in America it's quite contentious to do comedy about evolution, you know.
It gets a gasp.
It's the equivalent of doing material about fisting anywhere else, you know.
Now on my channel, of course, I couldn't care less about your private beliefs.
You're welcome to them.
The life-threatening laughter here is because of your attempts to marry 21st century science,
or even 16th century science, with the beliefs of people whose most advanced technology was
the open-toed sandal.
It's the ludicrous things you come up with to try to explain it all.
So please, creationists, believe what you like, but stop with the pseudoscience.
Stop being so hysterically funny.
Seriously, you're killing us.
Now how could all that vegetable material be laid down there, and yet this tree trunk
is going through it?
Behold, the atheist's nightmare.
If you're asking me, I firmly believe that the world is getting ready for the tribulation.
Well, what would happen as that poor dinosaur was breathing heavily in and out through those
very narrow nostrils?
Well, I'm telling you what would happen is the nostrils would catch on fire.
If the earth is five billion years old, this dark mulch should be 10, 20, 30 feet thick.
It's not even a foot.
How is the earth five billion years old?
It's the biggest bullshit ever told to man.
Can you imagine that?
