There were a lot of event movies to talk about that have come out in 2018 that echoed trends
that have shaped our cinematic past.
But there was one movie this year that is truly the embodiment of the modern epoch.
One movie that some have described as the most ambitious crossover of all time.
One movie that built so skillfully on the cinematic universe that came before it.
One movie that is the defining moment of our era.
I'm talking, of course, about Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again.
Mamma Mia! Here I go again!
Oh boy, the Great American Musical is back!
But, eh, I mean, on the one hand, high-time cultural milestone voice of a generation for
Wine Mom's Mamma Mia! got a sequel.
You know, so, being a grudge holder makes you fat?
But here's the thing, fam.
On top of movie pass going bankrupt, it's a streaming world now.
I don't like going outside.
And I really don't like giving my undivided attention to things.
And this newfound medium of streaming is reducing interest in the cinema.
I need a gimmick to get my ass out of the house and drive the whole 1.2 miles down to
the Rolling Hills AMC so I can see the latest release in 4K 3D.
If we have enough gimmicks, then surely interest in the cinema will revive.
Or will it?
So, obviously, the Hollywood panic of trying to incentivize people to stop watching goddamn
Stranger Things on Netflix for the fifth time, and to come on out to the movies by
pushing the prestige of gimmicks like 3D, 4D, and even 6D, applies more to big-budget
tentpoles like superhero movies, superhero movies, live-action remakes of Disney classics,
and even superhero movies, more than it does the Hollywood musical.
But that hasn't always been the case.
A long time ago, way back, back in those halcyon days before Valerian and the City of a Thousand
Planets, I had a segment in my video about Joel Schumacher's Phantom of the Opera alluding
to the crash and ultimately the final dumpster fire resting place of the big Hollywood movie
musical, namely Hello Dolly.
But the fall of the great American musical was, of course, much more complicated than
just one movie not making its money back.
And that is what we're going to talk about today.
Because in many regards, the dramatic and expensive death throes of the big Hollywood
musical in the 1960s had more in common with our current-day endless glut of sequels, remakes,
and superhero movies than it does with Mamma Mia, Here We Go Again.
There was a time when musicals were the biggest game in town.
It was a world dominated by Rodgers and Hammerstein, by Julie Andrews, by Gene Kelly.
For decades, the saccharine Broadway-style musical was the event movie.
These were the tentpoles of the mid-20th century, until one day, it all came crashing down.
With the advent of talkies, it wasn't long before musicals found their way onto the big
screen.
First through musical shorts featuring popular performers, and eventually full-length features.
Ever since the advent of sound, musicals were a consistently popular staple.
But in 1939, MGM Studios hired producer Arthur Fried, whose production unit went on to create
what would eventually become the golden era of movie musicals, with titles like Easter
Parade, On the Town, Singing in the Rain, and An American in Paris.
And in the 1950s and early 1960s, the way musicals built hype around their big important
movies was the roadshow.
So what is a roadshow, and how does it fit in here?
Well, it's a gimmick.
But a gimmick that was, particularly through the 1950s to the 1970s, used to promote more
prestige-oriented films.
You got your historical epics, your gut-wrenching war dramas, and of course, the larger-than-life
musical.
You're The Day the Earth Stood Still's and fluffy beach-blanket bingos couldn't
ne'er dream of having a roadshow release, but your Ben Hur's, your Dr. Zhivago's,
and your West Side Story's made for prime fodder.
Basically, before the film goes into wide release, a studio would take it on the road
for a limited, premium release.
Ticket prices were at a premium compared to your average film screening, but the marketing
appealed to a more luxuriant experience.
To quote Mike Todd, the leading purveyor of roadshows in the 1950s,
"'To show audiences gut class and appreciate the arts, they'd be insulted if you didn't
charge premium prices and make it a little hard to see.
This way they don't have to rub elbows with the gum-chewers.'"
Roadshow movies were usually longer than your average release, did not include any shorts
or trailers in front of them, and almost always had an intermission.
You can see this last element parodied in later movies, like Monty Python and the Holy
Grail.
Roadshow movies were presented with pre-recorded overtures, on-tracks, and exit music to mimic
an actual night at the theater.
They almost always included a number of souvenirs and accoutrements for audience members to
take home with them, including programs, pins, and all sorts of licensed merchandise.
So if you're wondering who the f*** would ever buy a $12 Infinity War Popcorn Bucket,
well, there is a precedent for that sort of thing.
And to be clear, roadshows were not only for movie musicals.
Gone with the Wind saw massive success with the roadshow marketing campaign, just that
the format of the musical lent itself well to the roadshow, making them the most common
and often the most popular.
In effect, to buy a ticket to a roadshow movie was to build prestige around the movie, to
make it feel more like an evening night or a Broadway show than just celluloid print.
And if this sounds like a really expensive ploy to get butts into seats, it's because
it is.
Which is why most of these films had a roadshow in a limited release, and ended up getting
a theatrical-cut wide release to most mainstream movie theaters.
But a successful roadshow garnered not only premium ticket sales and more rentals from
regular theaters, but also great word of mouth for a wide release, making them best-case
scenario a risky but profitable marketing method.
So this marketing strategy works well for big-budget movies for decades, and all seems
well and good.
But as movie studios were throwing this promotion at everything and anything being made, as
well as hitting almost toddler levels of managing film budgets themselves, comes the 1950s,
and there's a new game in town.
When you can get this wonderful new 17-inch Westinghouse set at a modest price.
But here's the thing, fam.
On top of the communists ruining everything, it's a television world now.
I have TV dinners to make, and going to the movies makes it really hard to milk any sweet
drops of affection from my loveless marriage.
I don't want to haul ass all the way out of the house and drive 12 miles to Los Angeles
to the Carthay Circle Theater.
Why would I pay more to see a movie that's going to get a wide release in a few weeks
anyway when I can watch Bonanza on the television from the comfort of my own home?
Some recognize the increased dependency on huge roadshows as a dangerous game.
According to Films and Filming in 1963, should these gigantic investments achieve the desired
outcome, Hollywood may well have found the definitive and triumphant answer to the threat
of television.
Should they encounter defeat, the whole face of the film industry may be drastically changed.
Will the public pay the higher prices made necessary by these colossal expenditures?
Is there an audience sufficiently large to permit these pictures to emerge without a
loss?
Will these fabulously expensive films can and will filmgoers absorb?
Around this same time, a string of expensive movie bombs nearly sink entire movie studios.
The most infamous from this era being 20th Century Fox's Cleopatra, a bomb of such
gigantic proportions that it nearly tipped the studio into complete bankruptcy.
Throw in the nascent cultural changes of the early mid-60s, and studios were starting to
realize that the whole concept of the roadshow just wasn't worth the investment anymore,
an aging relic that signaled it was time to let go and move on.
And then, something unexpected happened.
Winds in the east, mist coming in, like something is brewing, about to begin, can't put me
finger on what lies in store, I feel what's to happen, all happened before.
The Hollywood movie musical looks like it might be on its deathbed, and who should come
along to revive it but Walt Disney and Mary Poppins.
The film launches Julie Andrews' film career, ironically after her getting snubbed from
being cast in the role she originated on Broadway with My Fair Lady, and it won a ton of Academy
Awards, including Best Actress for Andrews.
Mary Poppins cost a relatively low $5.2 million to make, and it returned that amount at the
box office quickly, and though it did not run as a roadshow feature in the United States,
it did in London to great success.
Moreover, the film was doing equivalent business to a roadshow release, and Poppins was what
really convinced Disney that he should enter the roadshow musical business.
We'll get to that.
Then there was Warner Bros.' My Fair Lady, the most expensive at the time production
for the A-Link Studio, which was about to be up for sale at the time.
They cast Audrey Hepburn as Eliza Doolittle, a big star with a weaker voice to replace
the Broadway originator of the role, Julie Andrews, and not only does the roadshow gambit
pay off with a huge hit, it nets 8 Academy Awards.
But then, oh boy, here comes the big guns.
The Sound of Music is a big 1950s-style musical smack in the middle of the 1960s, and it does
record box office numbers for a roadshow feature.
The Sound of Music effectively single-handedly reversed the box office disaster 20th Century
Fox had with Cleopatra, so when it looked like the big musical juggernaut was finally
dying as the event movie trend in Hollywood, three big box office musical smashes happened
one right after the other.
Along with a wave of prestige that seemed to back up the phenomena, My Fair Lady, Poppins,
and Music were nominated for a combined 35 Oscars and garnered a total of 18 wins.
And studios lose their shit.
So what do they do in the face of these massive successes?
You gotta chase that trend.
But the earlier prevailing wisdom was that roadshows and big bawdy 1950s-style Hollywood
musicals were on their way out, and that was not wrong.
They were very much on their way out.
But studios were going to ignore this.
To their own downfall.
According to film historian Matthew Kennedy, in the seven years that followed The Sound
of Music, it became de rigueur for any film musical to be released in the roadshow format
if they wanted to be rightfully labeled major, important, or lavish.
The first canary in this coal mine actually came from the Disney company with The Happiest
Millionaire, a roadshow release completed after Walt's death that bombed so spectacularly
you've never heard of it.
But this wasn't a huge investment, and it didn't tank the studio.
Other studios did much, much worse.
Warner Bros. wants to recapture the success of My Fair Lady with another popular Broadway
musical vehicle, Lerner and Lowe's Camelot, a romantic love triangle story based on T.H.
White's The Once and Future King and a personal favorite of the Kennedy family.
It was, by all accounts, the production from hell.
Super expensive attention to detail of historical accuracy inflates the budget and causes delays.
It featured the cast mostly from hell, namely its star, Richard Harris, who was drunk to
a point of liability on set and constantly in giant fights with the producers, its third
party star as Lancelot, Italian actor Francis Nero, barely speaks English, and the production
is plagued by delays.
Most of its tremendously costly shoot in England is unusable, and all of this is going down
while Warner Bros. is being sold, and the studios basically like, fuck it, whatever,
just get it done.
Ultimately, the film ends up costing $15 million, making it the second most expensive Warner
Bros. production after My Fair Lady.
And in the midst of all this, roadshow prices are flipped up from $2 to $6.
And as we all know, raising prices for the exact same product for no reason to see the
exact same thing is a great way to get butts into seats.
Critical response to Camelot is dire.
Whereas The Sound of Music got ripped hard for its sentimentality, but not much else,
Camelot is almost universally panned, not just for its dated sense of traditionalism
and sentimentality, but for a lot of technical reasons.
Also, in contrast with musicals like The Sound of Music, no one gave a fuck about Camelot
the Musical before the film version, it having closed on Broadway in 1963 after a modest
three-year run.
It didn't have the fervent fanbase of other Broadway shows, nor did it have any artistically
inspired moments a la Mary Poppins.
And by 1967, movies like this are starting to feel like a relic.
Isn't that Malcolm there?
By this point, movies like Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf, Bonnie and Clyde, and Help
are revolutionizing cinema.
But these movies are new, unpredictable, and studios wanted to continue sinking their money
into what up until this point had been considered safe.
It's incredible.
It's impossible.
But it's true.
A man can talk to the animal.
Hey, people liked Rex Harrison and My Fair Lady, and people loved Mary Poppins.
Why not create an original musical based on an English children's book series that's
also a vehicle for Harrison?
At the time, Dr. Dolittle seemed like a good idea, given that a more child-friendly musical
with a large cast of animals would reach a larger audience and also be ripe for the picking
when it came to toyetic tie-ins.
But we have a problem.
Rex Harrison is a giant pain in the ass who, like Richard Harris, is tremendously difficult
to work with.
So Harrison leaves the film, and Christopher Plummer is brought on.
But then, hey-o, Rex Harrison wants back in, and the studio is still contractually obligated
to pay Plummer his agreed-upon salary.
There was also the constant recasting of Bumpo, the prince of a fictional African kingdom.
Yikes.
Bumpo was originally supposed to be played by Sammy Davis Jr., whom Harrison refused
to work with.
Said Harrison,
I don't want to work with an entertainer.
I want an actor.
A real actor.
Not a song and dance man.
But eventually the part was finally reduced, given to relatively unknown character actor
Jeffrey Holder, who had his name changed to…
William Shakespeare the Tenth.
God, this just keeps getting weirder.
Oh, and animals.
Oh, animals.
Two million dollars of the budget were allotted to the animal-related costs, quarantine fees,
which included a lot of giraffe-related mishaps, between one dying on set, trying to get Rex
Harrison to ride on one, and a three-day production delay that happened when, according to Doolittle
Choreographer, the giraffe stepped on his own cock.
The film ended up costing $18 million, triple the original budget.
And the final result is… a mess.
The roadshow for Doolittle became more of a focus group.
They were editing it as they were taking it on the road, trying to trim it based on audience
reactions, which was tepid to negative throughout.
All this to say nothing of the exorbitant amount of merchandising that accompanied the
movie.
With over 300 official pieces of Dr. Doolittle swag, from bikinis to pudding mix, worth $200
million, little of which sold.
To quote a Fox promotion staffer years later,
That f***ing Dr. Doolittle killed off merchandising tie-ins.
Ha ha ha.
Ha ha.
For now.
In the end, box office and critical response murdered Dr. Doolittle, with the movie only
grossing $9 million of its $18 million budget, and it being derided as a boring movie laced
with a white man's burden narrative and cartoonishly racist stereotypes of Africa.
Its legacy is perhaps summed up best by producer Robert Zanuck.
You look back now and ask, how could you have been so stupid?
Dr. Doolittle was conceived in a period of euphoria.
We were riding a musical wave that we didn't realize was going to come crashing down on
the beach all at once.
Sure, there were probably signs and warnings out there, but you were already so committed
financially and emotionally that it's very hard to pull the plug on these big undertakings.
Other films like Finian's Rainbow, Paint Your Wagon, and Man of La Mancha also underperformed
during this weird glut period.
But none landed with such an expensive thud as...
Well, hello.
Look who's here.
Dolly.
This is Louis.
Hello, Louis.
Dolly.
On paper, Hello, Dolly! seemed like a natural for film adaptation.
A light-hearted romantic comedy that swept the Tony Awards in 1964 with a then-record
Breaking 10 wins.
The casting of Barbra Streisand was bolstered by the success of Funny Girl a year before
the film's release.
Don't tell me not to live, just sit and putter Life's candy and the sun's a ball of butter
Cementing Streisand as America's darling.
But even then, the studio was ignoring how miscast Streisand was.
Dolly Levi is supposed to be, like, middle-aged, she's in her 50s, and at the time, Barbra
Streisand was 25.
The casting choice also snubbed Broadway role-originator Carol Channing for a younger, hotter actress
in the title role, resulting in a Channing-Streisand feud that was arguably more interesting than
the movie itself.
But there were already concerns about the relevance of the film, which was about the
romantic, sunny exploits of turn-of-the-century white New Yorkers from as high up as its own
director Gene Kelly.
To quote Kelly,
It's not the kind of film I would make as a first choice, but what else is there?
What happens now is that studios buy stage shows after they are already dated and then
spends a lot of money turning them into dated movies.
The musical is the victim of changing times.
So even director Gene Kelly kind of knew that this was kind of a bad idea, but they went
ahead and made it anyway.
Initially, Dolly was given a budget of $10 million, with $1 million alone going to Barbra
Streisand.
Of course, this too fell into budget hell.
Adding to that was a clause in the contract that Fox had struck with Broadway producer
David Merrick, that is, that the film version of Dolly could not be released within five
years of the original contract signing.
By 1969, with the Broadway production still in healthy financial shape, Dolly had been
sitting on the already cash-broke Fox's shelf for long enough.
In the end, Fox broke their contract and promised Zanuck an additional $2 million, along with
the promise to reimburse the Broadway production if its weekly box office fell below $60,000.
And while Dolly seemed poised to do well, if not sound of music numbers at the box office,
it did not have repeat viewers, audience admiration, or critical clout to keep up the momentum
or even turn a profit for Fox.
According to Matthew Kennedy, when Dolly finished production, 17 of the 25 top film rentals
were road shows.
In response, the industry prepared a bottleneck of reserved seat giants.
A record-breaking 12 were scheduled for release over the last four months of 1968.
Marketers faced a huge dilemma in catching people's attention amid the glut and convincing
them that the road show experience was still worth the time, cost, and effort.
With a road show opening practically every week, how do you market something as being
special when it isn't special anymore?
Said film critic Pauline Kael in the wake of the 1969 musical Paint Your Wagon, giant
musicals have finally broken the back of the American film industry.
There is almost no way, short of a miracle, that Paint Your Wagon can recover its costs,
although there are several other movies of this kind waiting to be released or to be
completed, and at least one of them is even more expensive.
It is highly unlikely that any new ones will be scheduled for production in the years to
come, or perhaps, ever.
There were outliers to this trend, like Fiddler on the Roof and Cabaret.
Fiddler was given the road show treatment, but carefully, and it sported no budget-breaking
stars, names, or elaborate sets.
Cabaret was not a road show, and very much falls into a more experimental, counter-cultural
rubric that has little in common with films like Dolly.
According to Matthew Kennedy, Fosse made a musical for people who hated musicals.
This wasn't the death of the musical, but it was the death of a certain type of musical.
But at the same time, it still speaks to this continued Hollywood truism, Hollywood digging
into certain ideas on what it considers safe long after these truisms are no longer true.
Add Pauline Kael in her review of Hello, Dolly!
At just the time for great new movie musicals, the moguls who can't see further than the
end of their cigars tell us that the form is dead.
Daryl F. Zanuck says you can't make little musicals, and the rest of the industry seems
to concur.
I think they're dead wrong.
I love musicals, but I hate big, expensive musicals because I have to wade through all
the filler of production values to get what I want to see, and I suspect there are millions
of people who feel the same way.
We have seen time and time again the film industry having to fight not only to keep
itself alive, but to keep it the most culturally relevant thing.
How do you compete with media that doesn't require you to go anywhere?
When you can get this wonderful new 17-inch Westinghouse set at a modest price.
The fall of the Hollywood musical created the landscape that would lead to the era of
the blockbuster.
Jaws, Star Wars, Indiana Jones.
We'd have gimmicks like 3D in the 1980s, which mercifully died until it came back.
And it's back.
I love it.
There was also the expansion of 70mm, which played well with films like Lawrence of Arabia,
and eventually IMAX.
And LIMAX.
The film industry upped its game with special effects that television, up until really,
really recently, could never hope to compete with.
And of course there was that goddamn 48fps bullshit with The Hobbit.
And of course now we not only have 3D, we have 4D.
But the rise and fall of the roadshow, Hollywood's focus on what they perceive as safe bets,
as well as their desire for trends to never change so that they can predict them, speaks
not only to the gimmicks Hollywood tries to keep on life support, but also to actual
trends as well.
But what is interesting to me is not so much the roadshow itself, but the insistence of
throwing money into genres and gimmicks that audiences are showing increased antipathy
for.
Just look at the recent trailers for Titans and Venom, films that the studios made to
respond to trends that died years ago, and the trailers to which were met with uproarious
laughter and yet someone edited in lines like
and whatever this is.
And high-fived each other in the editing bay and went, yeah, badass.
How do you do, fellow kids?
Just as we didn't get from
Why so serious?
to
Like a turd in the wind
overnight, there was a time and a place for the movie musical before they turned into
self-parody.
The ironic thing now is that Mamma Mia, Here We Go Again is this rare healthy being of
a movie that actually isn't riding a dying trend, and is responding to what a certain
audience wants to see.
There are a lot of wine moms out there, and they're all bankrupting moviepass.
With the merger of Disney and Fox, and the monopolization of an industry that was already
incredibly insular, we are creeping back to that 1960s level of fewer movies being released
and yet bigger and bigger budgets.
And have we hit a point where between domestic and international markets, these movies are
too big to fail and bring down the entire industry like it was in the 1960s?
Probably not.
Studios have gotten much better about at least not losing money the way they did in the 1960s,
but with more and more money being funneled into fewer and fewer projects, the current
state is beginning to resemble the studio system of the late 1960s, just ever so slightly
more monopolistic.
And again, one has to wonder where the studios are responding to a demand, or if they're
trying to force a trend on life support when in the real world, audiences were over it
a long time ago.
Then we will eat your face right off your head, like a turd in the wind.
I've seen trends you people wouldn't believe.
48 frames per second bouncing off the shoulder of a storm giant.
I've seen and smelled 4D versions of Josh Brolin's CGI Thanos face that looks like forgotten bacon.
All these moments will be lost in time, like turds in the wind.
Time to die.
Who are we shilling for today?
It's Skillshare.
Okay, so this episode was brought to you in part by Skillshare.
Skillshare is an online learning community with over 20,000 classes in design, business,
technology, and more.
So one of the most common questions I get is just about the ins and outs of how one
creates a video essay, and turns out they actually already have a class on that at Skillshare.
It's done by fellow YouTuber, Wendover Productions, and he's already created a class about how
he creates video essays, so if you want a tutorial, it's already there.
As for me, I'll actually be creating a class for Skillshare later in the fall.
It's going to be more about research.
As you can see, this episode was very research-heavy.
How does one go about organizing their research?
Well, we'll get to that.
Premium membership gives you unlimited access to high-quality classes on must-know topics.
The host must mention specific classes, categories, oh, I already did that.
For my special offer, you can go down to this URL, and that gives you two months of
access to over 20,000 classes for free.
Start today!
This episode was supported by viewers like you on Patreon.
As you can see, here are their names in the credits.
Some of them are even real names.
