First off, the Miller experiments, the Miller experiments, we were talking about these primordial
experiments that were done in the laboratory back in the 1960s, and then they've been refined
and repeated over and over and over again in the lab.
They by no means suggest anything about building blocks of life, in fact, Miller got far more
tall.
In the experiment, what you fail to bring out is the fact that he had to build a special
trap in order to catch these amino acids and quickly separate them from the primordial
soup as they form so that they wouldn't be broken apart.
The amino acid, he literally, in every experiment done since then, literally has to build a
trap to separate them, which you would not find a trap in nature, you would not find
a trap in nature, you would not find a trap in nature.
So again, that invalidates Miller's experiment.
In addition to that, scientists also know that when it comes to producing proteins,
not only do you need amino acids, but the proteins are built of only left-handed types.
Studies of pre-cambium rock and cambium rock show us conclusively the insides of these
rocks have been oxidized.
There may have been over a million times more oxygen present in the early atmosphere than
estimated, theorized, or originally projected.
And if that's the case, in addition to that, it wouldn't matter whether
it was a primordial earth that lacked oxygen, there would not be a sufficient protection
from radiation coming in from outer space, so any developing light in it.
It couldn't have occurred in the oceans either, or any kind of water for that matter.
Water is the universal solvent, and it breaks things down by a process called hydrolysis.
Very effective at dissolving and breaking down many different substances, including
amino acid bonds, and for that matter, the vast majority of chemical bonds will break
down in water.
The vast majority of chemical bonds will break down in water, and that includes your
poly nucleotides.
In the book, In the RNA World, written by Leslie Orgel, Leslie Orgel, Leslie Orgel,
who is an evolutionist, and Gerald Joyce, an evolutionary microbiologist, they state
about the RNA world theory.
This discussion has, in a sense, focused on a straw man, the myth of a self-replicating
RNA molecule that arose de novo from a soup of random poly nucleotides.
Not only is such a notion unrealistic in light of our current understanding of prebiotic
chemistry, but it would strain the fragility of even the optimist view of RNA's catalytic
potential.
That is from Orgel and Gerald Joyce, eminent evolutionary microbiologist, and Orgel was
an assistant researcher with Miller at Crick, and he was there with Miller's experiments.
Thank you.
