I was asked recently why I wasn't going to take up Christopher Monkton's invitation to a public debate.
Well, there's a very good reason.
Monkton hasn't invited me to one.
It turns out that this can be traced back to yet another piece of fiction published on the What's Up With That website.
Further references to Peter Hadfield, who will not engage in a face-to-face debate in a neutral venue, will be deleted.
The claim that I refuse to debate Christopher Monkton comes on top of made-up quotes attributed to me by the guy who runs the channel, Anthony Watts.
So in order to correct this latest piece of misinformation, I sent the following message to the same comments forum where it appeared.
The message basically says what I've just told you, that I haven't received an invitation, I haven't declined one, and that I'd be delighted to show him all my documentary evidence face-to-face.
Not surprisingly, the message didn't appear.
A few days later, I tried again, this time addressing the moderator, DBS, and ending with,
Please publish this so that people are not misled by your erroneous claim.
It still didn't appear.
So I emailed Anthony Watts, asking him to correct the error. No response.
I have no idea why Anthony has taken such an intense dislike to me.
Yes, me. Can you imagine that?
Now he's even banned anyone from mentioning me.
Although that rule doesn't seem to apply if you want to add to the fictitious claim that I won't debate Monkton, or if you want to criticise me in general.
I don't know exactly what I've done to deserve all this acrimony.
Why are you doing this?
I've been polite in all my exchanges, and even my rebuttal to Monkton on what's up with that doggedly stuck to the facts and cited evidence on every single point.
But whatever I've done to incur your wrath, Anthony, in the immortal words of Jack Nicholson,
Why can't we all just get along?
What's this?
No, that wasn't what I meant.
OK, let's instead take the same immortal words from Rodney King.
I just want to say, you know, can we all get along? Can we get along?
Can we stop making it horrible for the older people and the kids?
Yes, Anthony, for the sake of the kids and the old people, let's just get along.
If you hate the fact that I pointed out Monkton's many, many, many, many mistakes, from now on I'll believe everything he says unconditionally.
I won't check anything ever again.
Well, maybe I can put this better in a song.
Man, I sleep this night the long way crying.
Yeah, I've been crying, man.
I've been telling her I believed you, but I knew you were lying.
And right now you want to leave me alone.
Just tell me one thing, Anthony.
What did I do wrong?
Why do you hurt me so bad?
What did I do wrong?
Nah, Anthony, I'm just kidding. Don't go starting another rumour.
Look, as I've said before, you can run your site any way you like.
You can make stuff up and block people and censor messages.
It's your site.
But when it comes to making stuff up about me, I'm politely asking you to correct it.
And here's a fact you can check with Monkton yourself if you don't believe me.
I'll say it again, I've never received an invitation to debate him face to face in a neutral venue,
or anywhere for that matter, and I've never declined one.
If Mr Monkton wants to debate my allegations face to face,
I'll be happy to show him the documentary evidence,
and he can give his answers to each of the claims made.
Of course, this is unlikely to make much difference.
I doubt what's up with that will come clean and tell its readers what I've just said.
It'll either persist with this piece of fiction, or simply invent a new one.
After all, Monkton hasn't agreed to debate me face to face.
In fact, he opted out of a debate on what's up with that itself.
And yet I don't see any diktat that references to him should be banned,
and neither do I see any criticism of him on what's up with that for his unwillingness to debate.
