Scandinavia. Look at this arctic wonderland. Fjords, saunas, fjords, looped fish, blondes,
vikings, blond vikings? Fjords, Ikea, babies in government issued boxes, Santa, death metal,
and fjords. But like where exactly are the borders of Scandinavia because not all of this stuff is
in it. Scandinavia is just three countries exactly. Sweden, Norway, and Denmark. Three
kingdoms to be more precise. All of which are on the Scandinavian peninsula. Well except Denmark
and er plus Finland? Wait this doesn't help at all forget that. The three countries on this
peninsula can be collectively called Fennoscandia but if you do everyone will look at you weird
because no one except the nerdiest of geography nerds uses that word. Fennoscandia. So Scandinavia
is a term that's one part geography, one part history, and one part linguistics which is why
people will argue about who exactly is included. Finland is normally excluded because she used to
be considered one of the Baltic sisters with historical ties to mother Russia and Denmark
though on the other side of the sea is included because of her relationship it's complicated with
Sweden. They've had something like 15 to 21 wars between them depending on how you want to count it
and it's complicated er because they mostly fought over Norway and who wouldn't she's beautiful and
rich. Anyway when outsiders say Scandinavia they probably mean the Nordic countries. That's these
three plus Finland and Iceland. Though you can hardly blame people for confusion when organizations
like the American Scandinavia Foundation lists everyone as members and all the Nordic countries
sometimes advertise abroad under the banner of Scandinavia anyway. This is the Holland approach
to international relations. If there's a fun name that everyone likes and keeps using wrongly just
go with it. The Nordic countries get along well enough that they've made an official union the
Nordic Council, a Viking cool kids club that other northern European places occasionally
unrealistically dream of joining. Though the Baltic sisters do get to sit with them but not
actually vote on anything. The Nordic Council is largely a collection of committees that tries to
get its members to cooperate on common problems like the arctic environment and social welfare
and business in the region and also finds time to make a surprisingly long and hilariously specific
list of rules for how their logo can be used including a respect distance the sovereignty
of which must not be violated. But the biggest deal of the Nordic Council is that citizens of
these five countries get to live and work in any of the others which if you've seen the EU video
adds yet another semi-overlapping bubble of complexity to an already complex region. The
immigration rule however doesn't apply to Icelandic horses which are one super adorables and two
banished from returning to Iceland should they ever leave but that's a story for another time.
Now it wouldn't be a political union in Europe without some special territorial weirdness to
mention. Mainly Åland, an autonomous region of Finland that speaks Swedish and the Faroe Islands
and Greenland, both countries in the kingdom of Denmark. Greenland is really the odd girl out in
the Nordic club given that she's in the wrong hemisphere and that Greenlanders aren't historically
or linguistically related to nords. Also her flag ruins the otherwise consistent design motif but
she's part of Denmark because Vikings. Lastly there's Svalbard, an unincorporated territory
of Norway that must be mentioned because it has prepared for the apocalypse with a seed bank of
every plant to rebuild all of agriculture should it be necessary and it's also guarded by armored
bears. So that's that next time you say Scandinavia and you're not 100% sure who that includes just
say the Nordic countries instead.
