I never thought I would have to actually make a video where I would have to explain that I saw two reptilians.
That I did not account for.
Now I've got to hand it to Chris Constantine. That has to be one of the best opening lines of any video I've ever seen.
It just makes you want to learn more, doesn't it?
So we've got this count of the humans living amongst us who are the Tares, which are basically mini me, Nephilim, and none of us can tell the difference.
Hold on, Chris. I just have to say to anybody out there that if you haven't heard the old I saw someone turn into a reptile kind of story, then you've never spent a Friday evening in a London pub.
So let's listen to Chris's story in a more fitting environment down the local boozer.
There you go, Chris. Quite a bit of it and a pack of crisps.
Now what did I see? Well, I was just coming round the corner in a car...
I saw a guy standing outside of an office. He was almost a bit like, you know, he was kind of into the road.
That's why I was looking at him. I looked at him and he had a fox fur collar.
It looked rather camp, shouldn't it?
And I looked at him and for a moment I thought he was a clown or something.
Because his face and his hair were the same colour and pattern as this fox fur collar.
And my eyes just zeroed in on him and I thought, hey, is this a reflection? Is he painting his face? What's going on?
But it couldn't account for the hair, of course.
And I kept my eyes right on him as I went right up to him and then passed.
It stayed the same. It wasn't a shadow. The sun wasn't shining on it. It couldn't have been a reflection.
I hadn't gone bonkers because everything was normal.
Give me the arsehole, Jimmy.
I wasn't stressed out. Nothing.
I didn't give you the arsehole.
I thought it must have been a reflection and I left it at that.
However, the same evening, several miles away, I saw the same thing again.
Hold on, Chris. Just got to go for a Jimmy Riddle.
We'll get back to Chris's encounter with the reptile people later.
Meantime, let's go to our next worthy nominee.
What we're going to see is a giant human skeleton found somewhere in South America.
Little was said about it, according to my ghetto gospel, and it was whisked away to a forgotten storage bin somewhere.
Well, all I can say is that this isn't any part of South America I'm familiar with, judging from the style of dress.
And somewhere in South America is not a very convincing source.
But we do know that giant skeletons have been dug up with extraordinary frequency.
They have their picture taken and then we never see them again because apparently they get whisked away to forgotten storage bins.
But one thing they all have in common is a complete lack of a detailed source.
Where the photos came from and where they were published.
Without a source, even a fake one, the authenticity of the photo can't be checked.
So that should be an obvious sign that the photo may have been photoshopped.
But every now and again a hoaxer slips up.
This fake photo was the perfect hoax and even made it into a newspaper, The Hindu Voice.
Unfortunately the hoaxers were silly enough to break the first rule of hoaxing, never give a source.
And they claimed the photo was published in National Geographic.
Now that's very easy to check.
It turns out it wasn't.
And the editors at National Geographic were so fed up with being asked about this that they tracked down the real source of the photo,
a Photoshop competition held by a website called Worth1000.
If you're not convinced, here's the website showing the same photo winning third place in the competition.
And if you're still not convinced, here's the photo again.
And here's the original which was doctored.
It's an excavation of a mastodon in New York State.
These photos also look pretty convincing.
But an astute sceptic who runs this website noticed that both skulls had the same tooth missing
and appeared to be the same skull.
So I decided to check by superimposing one skull over the other.
And sure enough, they are identical.
So here are two hoaxers for the price of one.
Both of these dead giants have been Photoshopped.
So sorry, but these photos don't prove that giants rule the earth as the Bible says.
They show that gullible idiots rule the internet.
And if your belief in the Bible is based on a few obviously Photoshopped pictures,
then it's about as shallow as this phony grave.
The only other evidence the video shows us is this femur from a dead giant and this fossilised giant.
But unfortunately, My Ghetto Gospel once again makes the mistake of showing a source.
And when the picture is tracked down at the Mount Blanco Fossil Museum,
it turns out not to be the femur of a giant.
It says so in the caption, this is just a model of a femur of a giant made by the director of the museum.
Which is about as much proof of real giants as this plastic gnome is proof of real gnomes.
As for the fossilised giant, it turns out this photograph comes from Strand Magazine in 1895.
According to the magazine, the supposed fossil was part of a travelling freak show,
and Sixpence was charged to see it.
Frankly, it's easier to believe Chris's story about people turning into reptiles.
Talking of which…
Do what?
Sorry Chris, we're going to have to take a break again from your long story.
Now I always love videos that tell you they're going to disprove one of the most solid theories in science
backed by a mountain of evidence in less than five or ten minutes.
This guy's even more ambitious, claiming to be able to debunk all this evidence in less than three minutes.
You just know that what follows will be crap.
Oh sorry, I misjudged you. This is actually a very clear explanation as to how genetic traits are passed on.
This guy doesn't deserve to be a Golden Crocodile nominee.
Oh crap.
Look, heredity is even better understood than evolution. Even creationists accept it.
This is because genes are passed on. Offspring resemble their parents. If they didn't, you wouldn't look the way you do.
I mean, it's obvious you had no choice in the matter.
So when you say, this can't possibly happen, I don't care how fancy or complicated your explanation is,
the fact is that it does happen. But let's hear the fancy and complicated explanation anyway.
So as you can see in the middle, we have millions and millions of collagen proteins outside of the cell.
And they are no longer under the control of the genes that are in DNA.
So the big question, how do these millions and millions of proteins know to arrange themselves in the perfect order of the human hand, as you can see on the right?
Well of course, chemicals never know anything. They simply follow chemical laws. And collagen proteins follow these laws too.
All I can suggest, Said, is that if you want to know how something works in biology, look at the research and find out.
And if your question hasn't been answered yet, wait until it is.
I've found a number of research papers on how collagen fibrils are formed.
These are the long chain bundles that make up the basic structure of the hand.
If you think this biochemistry is impossible, and that somehow the collagens have to be moved into place by an intelligent designer,
then all I can say is that either the intelligent designer is very sloppy, or he's disturbingly malicious.
I'm not going to give a lecture on this because it's not my field, but one thing I can explain is that genetic traits do indeed get passed on.
Insects that bore through the wooden stories of houses, for example, pass on their physiology and their behaviour to future generations of insects that bore through wooden stories.
And talking of boring stories...
Obviously this is a bit tricky to talk about.
I don't know what you're doing, Mum. Go get it.
These people are sub-human to God. It's called a circle.
A circle is not necessarily just the same. It can be a lizard type creature. Is there any lizard type creature that can do this?
Yes there is, and here he is.
Now, bringing all of this down to earth...
Oh dear. As usual, Friday night at the Dog and Duck has descended into an anarchic punch-up thanks to the arrival of the Chelsea Shed Boys.
Sorry Chris, I'm afraid the explanation of these reptile people will have to wait for another night.
But voters for the coveted Golden Crocoduck can make up their minds now. Do you Adam and Eve it, or is Chris telling porky pies? We report you decide.
Well, I met with my job. I worked for UNICEF, which is an amazing organisation that works in over 150 countries.
And my job was to meet with teenagers who were living in exclusion, who were living in extreme poverty and living with HIV and write their stories.
Listen to their stories and write for UNICEF. And so, I'm here.
Reptilicus, a monstrous massive beast whose astounding appearance causes panic.
Reptilicus approaching the city! Repeat, Reptilicus approaching the city!
