Eric, why did you send her away? You desired her and she was yours to use exactly as you
pleased. Why risk offending the Shah for the sake of a girl who was only a slave? He gave
a great cry of rage, lifted the table in front of him, and threw it across the room with
a force that splintered the legs asunder from the marble top.
Only a slave! Only an animal!
He roared.
You asinine Persian dolt! Get out of my way! Quickly! Before I forget all that I owe you!
Is this another of your quaint and delightful customs?
He demanded furiously.
Has no one in this godforsaken court heard of a decent period of mourning?
I raised my shoulders helplessly.
The Shah's sister is his personal property to be disposed of as he sees fit. Eric looked
at me incredulously.
Are you telling me the girl is transferrable? Like the Grand Vizier's signet ring that
whoever takes one must take the other?
I sighed. It is often the custom in such matters.
Oh, I see.
He said contemptuously.
Legalized rape is the done thing here, is it? Any man may force himself upon a woman
and say it is the custom. My god, what a country!
And he turned away with such fierce disgust that I felt faintly ashamed of my own race.
She is poor and has children to feed. I am able to pay the price, she asks, without hardship.
Why should I stand here and haggle with her like a miser?
She expects it, Eric. I tell you, it is the custom.
Fuck. Your. Customs.
There is something intrinsic in human nature that when someone says,
This thing belongs to us, not you, and no, you can't have it, the excluded group loses
their shit, whether they actually would have wanted the thing or not. Like, I didn't want
to go to Shelley's birthday party. I don't even like Shelley, but I find out that I'm
not invited.
Oh. That bitch.
This attitude dominates discussions of cultural appropriation in particular, where one group
says, no, this thing belongs to us and actually has deep cultural and religious significance
that you clearly do not understand, nor do you care to, so maybe don't wear a featherhead
dress as part of your lingerie line. Like, maybe the excluded group has zero interest
in wearing a featherhead dress with a lingerie line, but they're kind of offended at the
idea that someone said you can't.
Why can't I do sexy featherhead dress? I didn't steal your land or violate countless treaties
or give you diseases to which you had no natural immunity. I personally was not there. And
no, I wasn't going to wear a sexy feather headdress, but I should be able to without
being called problematic.
But this attitude is nothing new. Let us go back to the mid-19th century, when travel
writing was all the rage and there was particular interest in the Orient. And I don't mean that
Orient, although that was certainly also a thing, but in this case, Egypt, the Ottoman
Empire, and Persia.
It is from male European travelers to the Ottoman Empire that Europe was introduced
to the idea of the harem, but only the idea, because men weren't allowed into harems.
See? That's kind of the whole point. Only women and male relatives are allowed into
harems. Them's the rules.
And of course, our 19th century Eurotrash did not like that. Why won't you let me into
your club filled with slave ladies wearing those sexy belly dancer outfits and those
finger symbol thingies and those badass eunuchs with their sabres? Why can I not have the
ring?
And with this desire to be included in a space in which they were not allowed, their presumptions
about the culture they were visiting combined with this forbidden space made their imaginations
run wild.
If we aren't allowed in there, it must be because it's sexy. Licentious. It must be
full of these sexy slave babes who don't really want it, but also kinda want it.
These are some early mainstream European examples of what Columbia University professor of literature
Edward Said defined as Orientalism in his 1978 book, Orientalism.
European depictions of the Middle East date as far back as the medieval period. The Crusades.
A thing that happened.
But the rise of what we'll call Orientalist media really begins in the 18th century, as
major European world powers go into war with the Ottoman Empire. Operas like Mozart's Abduction
from the Seraglio, travelogues like Lady Elizabeth Craven's A Journey Through Crimea to Constantinople,
and Lord Byron's poetry-slash-personal antics were all popular proliferators of this concept
of the Eastern Other.
But where 19th century Orientalism really took off in the visual and language arts coincided
with Napoleon's failed attempts to invade Syria and Egypt, and the British Empire's
efforts to destabilize the Ottoman Empire at the beginning of the 19th century. As both
world powers sought to colonize these areas, demand back home created an explosion of art
centered around the Middle East and Central Asia, often by artists who had never actually
been to said territories, but you know, they had like a friend who knew someone whose cousin
had done like one of those Nile cruises. And as a result, we got art that looks something
like this.
slave babes
But for your average Jack and Jacques back in Mother's England and France, this emerging
visual culture dominated perceptions of these countries. No, paintings like this were not
based in reality. Yikes. But Victorian Europeans thought that they were. It's like if aliens
tried to make art depicting what being an American in 2019 is like, but only having
like Nickelback as a reference. But you know, they've never actually seen Nickelback. They've
only like heard about them second or third hand and maybe they've seen like the photograph
meme.
Eventually, travel writing by European women became a thing and tried to clear up this
incorrect assessment of what harem life was like because being women, they were allowed
into harems. Turns out harem life is actually pretty boring. And no, they don't dress like
that. And no, that's not what an odalisque is, Susan K. I'm not saying it was a good
social order. I'm just saying it was nothing like the sexy licentious slave babes that
these dudes imagined it to be. But the damage was done. And to this day, when you hear the
word harem in the oxidant, it conjures up a very specific, very 19th century image.
Sexualized, licentious, appropriative, and above all, inaccurate. But who cares? It's
just media. It's just writing. It's just a painting. It doesn't have any real world consequences.
And besides, they do it to us too. Watch any movie designed for non-American audiences
that features an American character and it's like, oh. So that's what that's like.
And of course that is true, but it is completely disingenuous to say that orientalist depictions
of the middle east had no real world consequences in terms of real world politics. Categorically,
it did. Just within the last year, German far right and totally not neo-nazi group AFD,
anglicized as Alternative for Germany, used one of the more notorious orientalist paintings,
Jean-Leon Jerome's The Slave Market, as part of a propaganda campaign against Syrian refugees
being allowed entry into Germany. But other less overt examples pervade mainstream media
as well. 300 is hilarious, but kind of also an insidious depiction of a war between the
east and the west. And more recently we have the post 9-11 gritty realism trend of films
set in the middle east, but we're not getting into that today. So we gotta colonize the
motherfuckers I guess. This is the rationale behind colonization in general. Like, yeah
sure we want their stuff, but really we're doing them a favor by colonizing them. I mean
look at them. It's for their own good. Y'all need Jesus. And they've got this crescent
moon. That's not a cross. And they've got this club they won't let us into and I don't
like it. And while neither Egypt, the Ottoman Empire, nor Persia were ever technically colonies,
some of their stuff was. And their historical trajectories were all deeply impacted by the
effects of colonialism, the consequences of which haunt us to this day. Now I know what
you're thinking. We're like 10 minutes into this video and you're like, this is not what
I was promised by the thumbnail. I was promised 80s melodramatic rock opera, and I'm getting
to that. But the backdrop of Orientalism is important to this discussion. If you've never
read Gaston Leroux's 1910 novel, The Phantom of the Opera, you probably don't know where
I'm going with this. But if you have read it, you totally know where I'm going with
this. Enter the Persian, one of the main characters in Gaston Leroux's Phantom of the Opera, a
fan favorite, a character so central to the narrative that basically the entire second
half is told from his point of view, and a character that is either whitewashed, altered,
or omitted entirely from the vast majority of the hundreds of adaptations of Phantom
of the Opera. Like, nearly all of them. Like, at least 95%. Hmmmm. And on the rare occasion
when he's not cut out, we get
You asinine Persian dolt.
The one well-known-ish adaptation, or in this case, retelling, that does feature the Persian
in any role of prominence is Susan Kaye's 1990 novel titled only Phantom, which falls
squarely into the worst flavors of 1980s Ayatollah, Asahollah, anti-Iranian sentiment combined
with good old fashioned 19th century Orientalism, which
Legalized rape is the done thing here, is it? Any man may force himself upon a woman
and say it is the custom.
This book is also extremely popular with a fandom. And incidentally is not available
on audible. And there was a time when Phantom fandom had no goddamn sense of humor and you
were not allowed to criticize this book. But it's 2020, Phantom shitposting is finally
a thing, and I am the god. But we'll get to that book.
First, let's take a look at the source material. Who is this Persian? What is his function
within the novel? And why is he omitted from nearly every single one of the shit million
adaptations of Phantom of the Opera?
Gaston Leroux's novel isn't all that dissimilar from either the 1925 Lon Chaney movie or Andrew
Lloyd Webber's musical or even its terrible film adaptation directed by Joel Schumacher.
The key difference is the novel was originally published in serial form and framed more as
a mystery instead of a tragic romance with new increments of the story introduced each
week. Who is doing the bad thing? Could it be the manager? Could it be the rat catcher?
Could it be the Vicomte de Chagny's older brother Philippe? Could it be this shady ethnic
in the Astrakhan cap that's always running around the opera? Or could it be the skull
faced incel who lives in the basement? Who's to say?
I'm going to summarize the original novel, and yes, it does spoil the whole thing, so
spoilers for Phantom of the Opera.
Our story begins when the prima donna Larcolada falls ill, and is replaced by this young ingenue
no one's ever heard of named Christine Daae, and she brings the house down with how amazing
she is. During her performance, she is recognized by her childhood friend, the fuckboy Vicomte
Raoul de Chagny, and he goes to her dressing room to say, hey, good job, but he overhears
her talking to this guy who claims to be her voice teacher, and being a fuckboy, he's
like, oh, slut.
In the meanwhile, there's all these mysterious goings on. Someone calling themselves the
opera ghost is extorting the new managers, some guy turns up dead with the news around
his neck, there's this shady brown fellow poking around the opera all the time, and
amidst it all, Christine just disappears. And of course the fuckboy is like, slut.
Couple weeks later, there's a masquerade, and hey, she's back, and she pulls Raoul
aside and tells him where she's been, and of course the victim-blaming fuckboy is like,
slut. And she's like, no, what do I have to explain to you? That I was kidnapped by a
skull-faced incel named Eric, who, well, admittedly, he told me he'd let me go as long as I didn't
ever touch his mask, and you remember that thing I said earlier about human nature, where
someone says, you can't have the thing, or you can't see the thing, and under normal
circumstances, you wouldn't have really cared, but, you know, someone said you can't, like,
see, anyway, she took off his mask, he loses his shit, and he says, you can never leave
my lair, and she's like, no, you look great. Basically, she pulls that act off long enough
for Eric to let her out of the basement so she can tell the victim-blaming fuckboy, oh
please, God help me, and he's like, okay, how about we leave together after your next
big performance? So after the next big performance, Christine just disappears right off the stage,
like right in the middle of the stage. And if we're watching the musical, this would
be the track down this murderer portion that leads into the final lair scene, but we're
only about halfway through the book. Enter the Persian. He's never given a name because
the framing device is LaRue telling the story like he's a journalist presenting it almost
like found footage, like it really happened, and since in-universe the Persian isn't on
great terms with, you know, the Shah, he's trying to protect this guy's identity. In
terms of Gilded Age literature, at which LaRue's original novel falls right at the tail end,
the Persian is an interesting character because, in most regards, he does not fall within late
Victorian orientalist tropes. Like, the tragic backstory stuff totally does. When the narrative
goes back to Eric's time in Persia when they first got to know each other, it definitely
does the, ooh those exotic Orients, they love their bloodsport, the royals watch murder
just for fun, just like the Romans, so barbaric. See, Eric moved to Persia to be like a circus
performer slash architect, and while he was here, he made all this amazing architecture
for the Shah. This was also where he learned to do murder real good. That's the Punjab
lasso that is very clumsily handled in the musical and even more clumsily in the film
somehow. It's a sneaky foreign way to kill. He Insta-garots you and you never see it coming,
and the Shah loved watching Eric do this. He thought it was great. Well, anyway, the
Shah liked Eric, but Eric knew too much, so he has to die, I guess, and the Persian, who
has a soft spot for Eric, helped him escape and basically covered for him. The Shah suspected
the Persian did this, but lacking proof, and since the Persian is like his fifth cousin
or something, banished him from court instead of killing him, and he also gave him a nice
pension. And so, in his new life in Paris, the Persian basically spends all his time
keeping an eye on Eric and making sure he didn't do too many murders, and Eric pays
him back by not murdering him when he happens to venture too close to his underground lair.
So LaRue's depiction of Persia in the 1850s, when Eric and the Persian met, fell right
into that orientalist trope of barbaric, exotic, and feminine orient. But the character himself
is kind of ahead of his time in that, in a narrative that centers mostly white people,
he has a character at all. He isn't exoticized, except insofar as everyone thinks he's kinda
shady before they get to know him, he isn't barbaric, he doesn't shroud himself in mysticism,
and his otherness is not at all used to set him apart from the rest of the characters.
He is arguably the most well-rounded character in the book, and easily the most likable.
And he doesn't die!
So basically Raoul goes into the basement to rescue Christine, but gets circumvented
by the Persian, who's like, hey dude, you are going to die in like half a second if
I don't help you. Raoul, understandably suspicious, is like, who are you, how do you know all
this, and the Persian is like, look, Eric and I basically went to college together,
he did me a solid and I did him a solid, but I also got booted out of Persia BECAUSE
of this asshole, so now I'm wasting my golden years cleaning up his messes. They make it
all the way down to Eric's house by the lake under the opera, but then oops, accidentally
end up in the torture chamber he has in his house. For, um, some reason. So that's okay,
sure. Eric doesn't even notice that they're there at first, because he's too busy Christine
an ultimatum that she either has to marry him or he's going to blow up the opera house.
She finds out the Persian and Raoul are in there, and in short order Eric does too, and
he turns the torture chamber on. It's basically a sauna. Eventually Christine is like, okay
okay I'll marry you, just please let these guys go, and Eric is like, okay, and he does,
and the Persian wakes up in his home like nothing had happened. So by this point the
Persian is like, you know what, I have covered for this asshole for way too long, I don't
care what I owe him, I have paid my debt to his ass, I'm going to the police and I'm telling
them everything. And just as he's about to do that, knock knock, guess who's at the door,
it's Eric! And he plops down on the Persian chaise lounge and he's like, hey bud, um,
I'm sorry about all that, uh, I let her go, um, as far as I know she's going to elope
with Raoul, um, are we cool? And the Persian is like, dude what the fuck? When Christine
agrees to marry him, Eric in his infinite crazy assumes that she is totally playing
him and has every intention of killing herself rather than being his wife, because he is
just the worst. Which he is. But as in the musical, she kisses him and he realizes like,
holy shit, she's actually willing to go through with this. It is at this point that he concedes
to himself how horrible he's been and is so overcome with emotion that he lets her go,
gives her his blessing, and makes her promise that she'll come back and bury him once he
dies of all this love he's feeling, which given that we've still got some Victorian
vapors going on, should be in a couple weeks or so. Eric relates all this to the Persian,
who relates it to the narrator, LaRue. Eric presumably does die, Christine presumably
does come back to bury him, and the Persian dies an old man, safe and happy in his home
in Paris. The end. So with regard to the most famous Phantom adaptation, in terms of pure
plot utility, you probably recognize the character of the Persian in the character of Madame
Giry. She kind of floats around, warns people about stuff, and then when the time comes,
she's the one who shows Raoul how to get down to the lair and how to protect himself against
the Punjab lasso. Hell, in the film version, she's even involved in the tragic backstory
and helps him escape the thing, both traits from the Persian in the original novel. I'm
not saying Andrew Lloyd Webber is bad for replacing the Persian with a white woman.
He's bad for other reasons. But little known fact about Andrew Lloyd Webber's Phantom
of the Opera is that the original plan was not to write an original musical, but to produce
Ken Hill's 1976 adaptation of Phantom of the Opera, which Hughes extremely close to
LaRue's book and does feature the Persian as a major supporting character. In fairness,
this musical is just really genuinely terrible, and I can't say they made the wrong choice
by deciding to ghost on Ken Hill and then just writing their own. But it must needs
be remarked, but one of the major changes that they made from the Ken Hill musical,
itself the inspiration for the current Broadway behemoth, is that it cuts out the Persian.
The closest thing that could be considered a reference, either to the character or Eric's
time in Persia, is this here monkey, which… I mean I've seen this show like 400 times
and I still don't know what they were going for with the monkey. And this falls within
the trend of adaptations not only cutting the character out, but leaving in a replacement
role, basically conceding that some character performing the Persian's role in the story,
at least if you keep it as close to the original novel as Andrew Lloyd Webber did, is necessary
for the plot. As long as they're white. This began with the first big adaptation,
Karl Lamali's 1925 feature film The Phantom of the Opera starring Lon Chaney. The Persian
is in this movie, he's got his Astrakhan cap and everything, only he's not actually
here. This is not Persian at all, but a French white police inspector named Ledoux who's
pretending to be Persian for… reasons. And he's been tracking that phantom for months.
In disguise? And now he's found him, but instead of involving the police, for whom
he works, instead he just takes Raoul for some reason. You can probably guess why. Yep,
tale as old as film. The earlier cuts of the film originally hewed way closer to the novel.
That Astrakhan cap is there because in the original cut, Ledoux was the Persian. Even
his casting choice is somewhat telling. Ledoux's actor, Arthur ibn Karoo, was actually born
in Armenia and was a character actor known for playing shady foreigners, such that he
rarely got to play a good guy as he does in this movie. And it also had the novel's
ending, with Erik letting Christine go instead of being eaten alive by an angry mom. So they
shot it, and then they changed it, and the Persian was a secret white the whole time.
And that trend did not exist in a vacuum either. This follows Paramount's 1921 hit The Sheik,
starring Rudolph Valentino, in which Valentino Sheik is portrayed… differently. But it
being a romantic comedy and that the eponymous Sheik gets the girl in the end, don't worry.
We find out that he was actually a secret white the whole time, just like Esmeralda.
I should do a video about characters of color and media who were, like, revealed to be secretly
white the whole time. We can call it Dolezals.
Now this was before the Hays Code, so it wasn't yet mandated that the bad man must be punished
on screen, but the studio thought that should be the case because early audiences didn't
We cannot have the bad man, what does the murders, get a sympathetic, tragic ending.
And moreover, we cannot have an ethnic be both a central character and heroic. And live.
The 1943 version has not one, but two Raoul's who vie for Christine's affections.
One is a cop and the other likes to play detective, so they team up to rescue Christine. I mean,
they don't really have a history with the Phantom, but they kind of serve the purpose
of expediting the third act along to its conclusion. Also, this movie kind of owns because it ends
with Christine fucking off without either of them. Like, bye!
Then, yes, Phantom on Ice. The Phantom has, like, a whole chorus of acolytes slash groupies
that exist. I feel like we don't talk enough about the fact that there was, like, this
whole era of human history where Thing on Ice was so ubiquitous it was parodied in an
episode of Rugrats.
Reptar, you have come back to me. Yes, dear, indeed I have.
Speaking of the 90s, possibly the most early 90s Thing ever set to film, Phantom of the Mall,
yes, a real movie, wherein the Phantom Eric does not torturedly play the organ in his basement,
he torturedly lifts. He is not an angel of music, he is an angel of roundhouse kicks.
And in this version, our Persian is... it's Pauly Shore.
I promise not to spit in your yogurt.
The 1990 movie starring Charles Dance, yes, that Charles Dance,
our Persian replacement is Eric's dad, played by Burt Lancaster, who hid him away as a baby
and raised him to be a... Phantom of the Opera that punches plastic deer.
Oh yeah, let's watch that again.
In 1998, Italian filmmaker Dario Argento directed his own adaptation and the sort of romantic
analogue between its Phantom and Persian replacement, and in this one the Phantom is a tortured
rapist who is not deformed and our Persian surrogate is a bunch of rats. Friendly friendly
rats. This, for the record, is the worst adaptation of Phantom. It's the worst one.
It's bad. But of course the most well-known replacement is Madame Giry in the Andrew Lloyd
Webber adaptation, who serves the purpose of filling in the Phantom's backstory after
seeing him on his world freak tour years prior. There was, I shall never forget him,
a man locked in a cage. But being too chicken shit to do anything else after ratting him out
to the gilded youth. He lives across the lake, monsieur. This is as far as I dare go. And all
of this is to say nothing about adaptations that change their source material so much that there
isn't really a Persian surrogate at all, like the 1962 Hammer horror film starring Herbert Lam,
or the only good Phantom of the Opera movie, Brian De Palma's 1974 film, Phantom of the Paradise.
I know drug reel from Real Real! Of course the Persian is not absent from 100% of adaptations,
even if he is absent from all of the ones you've ever heard of. There was a 1988 animated movie
that's one of those like classic literature for kids things from the 80s that had a budget of like
two. You can find the house by the river? Come. And he's also in the terrible 1991 musical that
was released on video and sold in all of the stores and poor fools kept buying it,
thinking it was the Andrew Lloyd Webber musical and then being horribly disappointed when they
got home. You may follow me into the darkness if you like, dar-o-ga. Because for the most part,
the trend with this character, despite being extremely well liked by fans, has been erasure,
because I guess we just don't know what to do with him. But when it's not erasure,
are you telling me the girl is transferable? Like the Grand Vizier's signet ring that whoever
takes one must take the other? I sighed. It is often the custom in such matters. Oh, I see.
He said contemptuously. Legalized rape is the done thing here, is it? Any man may force himself upon
a woman and say it is the custom. Well, then we circle back to Orientalism. This is all a prelude
to discuss what is debatably the most memorable take on the character outside of the original
novel, Susan Kay's Phantom and how much it bites hard. Look at this cover. Yeah, this is a reprint.
The original was much more like 90s romance novel. You try being the only girl in the Phantom forums
who hated this book in 2001. Anyway, I'm just explaining myself because a lot of Phantom fans
really like this book and it really changed a lot of the foundations of the fandom itself.
Most fans even call the Persian by the name Susan Kay gave him in the book, Nadir Khan. So Phantom
is basically a 600-page novel about the life of the Phantom, split into six different points of
view. Nadir is the point of view character for Eric's 20s, which he set squarely in Iran,
then Persia, starting in the year 1850. So let's take a look at Persia in 1850. Nasir al-Din Shah
was the actual real-life Shah, newly in his reign, and this book paints him as an ineffectual
bloodthirsty backwards tyrant. You know, Iran didn't have great luck with Shahs for the last
200-ish years of them. But on the real, Nasir al-Din Shah was a mixed personality whose reign is
marked by the constant Sturm and Drang about modernizing Persia by Western standards. And in
absolute fairness, the Shah of Persia at the time was what academic historians describe as a f***ing
weirdo. During research for this, we learned about a game he'd play with his wives and children
called Lights Out where he'd just like turn the lights off and everyone in the room would just
have to beat the shit out of each other in total darkness. Monarchs. But he didn't like jerk off
using the blood of virgins and assassinate half of his court as he does in this book. And this
is another way that the book really influenced the fandom, by playing into these ugly 19th century
orientalist tropes. We have to make Eric's backstory all harsh and tragic, and part of that
is painting Persia as this cutthroat awful place, with stuff like corruption and executions and
slavery. So much slavery. Which was nothing like the US in the 1850s. LaRue's original novel frames
Eric against a world that is horrible, that everywhere he went molded him into the nightmare
fuckboy he turned into. It is the same sort of like Ender's Game logic where it's like,
I know you have a kind and gentle heart, but you're just so good at murder. In a better world,
or hell, if he had just been normal looking, he would have been a respectable man. In fact,
that is how the original novel ends, LaRue lamenting how terrible the world is to disadvantaged
people, and positing that Eric could have been one of the world's great minds if the world wasn't
so shitty to people with disabilities. Which, for 1910, is a pretty nuanced take. Hell, for now it's
a nuanced take. Eric looked like a monster, so people treated him like one, and he behaved like
one in kind, but he was not born a monster. But while Susan Kay does not drop that angle,
the entire Persia sequence is framed as different from all of the other locations,
which are set in France and Italy. It was Persia that really made him into a monster,
because the culture is just that bad. So after all this, you might be asking yourself what the
point of this video was. Was it really just an elaborate excuse to talk about Phantom of the
Opera for half an hour and dump on this book? Yes. But while we're here, I don't mean to imply
that Gaston LaRue was intentionally trying to write the wokest book ever featuring a non-western
character. But I don't think it was unintentional that he went out of his way to place a Persian
character as basically the moral backbone of his story in a market that basically demanded white
heroes and relegated everybody else to stereotype, spectacle, or both. Fundamentally, Orientalist
media and the stereotypes it creates, even what we see as benign or even benevolent,
are a kind of erasure, a simplified refutation of the realities of a lot of people. But it is
erasure that serves a socio-political purpose as well. And I think it's interesting that with this
character, we effectively had nothing but erasure all the way up to the late 1980s. And once the
Persian was reintroduced back into Phantom fandom through Kay's novel, in a lot of ways it was a lot
more regressive than LaRue's original novel was, and fans were keen to embrace the more
Orientalist tropes, effectively replacing erasure with Orientalism. I was in those forums 20 years
ago too, and while I never liked this book, I can't say I did not uncritically enjoy some of
those Orientalist elements extracted both from the book and from the original novel. And Phantom of
the Opera is far, far from the only modern example where this is a thing. This isn't to say you're a
bad person if that angle appealed to you, but rather I would like to encourage you to critically
think about why that angle appealed to people. Why do so much of old western media be like that?
Why do so much of it still be like that? And recognize that there are some very real consequences
to Orientalism in media, even from ignorant racists painting sex slaves in the 19th century.
But I also wonder, could there be an adaptation of Phantom of the Opera that keeps the character
of the Persian and this idea of Eric living in Persia for a while as a part of his backstory
without incorporating those ugly Orientalist tropes? The world has changed a lot in the 110
years since Phantom of the Opera was published, but for all of its pulpiness and ham-fisted
Edwardian melodrama, it still keeps getting remade and re-enters the conversation. But the
consistent erasure of one of its main characters is a testament to how little the needle has nudged
in this one regard. And while we're here, part of the reason I kept putting off releasing this video
was because of escalating tension between the US and Iran, and given that this whole episode
concerns an Iranian character, I wasn't sure how or even if I should address that. And even now,
we still don't know what's going to happen or how this is going to play out, but I will say this.
In times of stress, there is a tendency to fall back on narratives that feel familiar. And if we
keep seeing narratives of a certain people being othered enough, eventually it makes sense to start
conflict with these people, even if there's no benefit to either side in doing so, save perhaps
the political. So I wonder if it is possible to challenge ourselves to evolve past these narratives
which have already caused so, so much harm. But again, maybe that's just human nature.
And with that, now I have to do my ad read. I of course was going to recommend some version of
Phantom of the Opera, but instead I'll recommend the book that I'm listening to right now,
which is Ronan Farrow's War on Peace, the end of diplomacy and the decline of American influence.
Hey, speaking of Iran, and to help motivate you, Audible is issuing a challenge to current
and new members. Finish three audiobooks by March 3rd and get a $20 Amazon credit.
Yeah, I'm almost done with my three. $20 here I come. Finish 3x33 and get $20. Visit
audible.com slash Lindsay Ellis or text Lindsay Ellis to 500-500. Start listening with a 30-day
trial and choose one audiobook and two Audible originals absolutely free. Listen on any device,
anytime, anywhere, at home, at the gym, on your commute, or on your way to the anti-war protest.
You also enjoy easy exchanges for any audiobook you don't love and an audiobook library you keep
forever, even if you cancel or if we go to war with Iran. Visit audible.com slash Lindsay Ellis
or text Lindsay Ellis to 500-500. So get started with your free trial.
That was awkward.
Okie dokie, here's me reading some quotes about slavery.
Why risk offending the Shah for the sake of a girl who is only a slave? He gave a great cry of rage,
lifted the table in front of him, and threw it across the room with a force that splintered the
legs asunder from the marble top. Only a slave. Only an animal. You asinine Persian dolt,
he roared. Get out of my way quickly before I forget all that I owe you. I'm fed up with this
world. I raised my shoulders helplessly. The Shah's sister is his personal property to be
disposed of as he sees fit. Eric looked at me incredulously. Are you telling me the girl
is transferable? Well, the grand vizier's signet ring. Whoever takes one must take the other.
I sighed. It is often the custom in such matters. Oh, I see. Legalized rape is just
a done thing here, is it? He said contemptuously. Any man may force himself in and say it's the
custom. My God, what country? And he turned away with such fierce disgust that I felt
faintly ashamed of my own race.
