Let's take a moment to go back, all the way back to the early 1990s.
It was a time following the wildly successful nascent Disney renaissance and the mostly
lucrative career of Andrew Lloyd Webber and his high-octane melodramas.
So from this ecosystem rises a most unlikely musical adaptation of a literary classic.
I'm in a new Andrew Lloyd Webber musical based on the hunchback of Notre Dame.
It's called Hunch.
This parody in the ABC animated comedy, The Critic, came out in 1994.
The Hunchback of Notre Dame!
That's me!
Two years before Disney would go, let's do that but, you know, for real.
Out there, my ordinary man.
Yes, I've got a hunch this is love.
Enter Disney's 34th animated feature film, The Hunchback of Notre Dame.
A film that traumatized countless millennials with its dark storyline, a score that makes
church music seem sunny and cheerful by comparison,
and the scarring miscasting of Jason Alexander.
It's hopeless, absolutely hopeless.
You're telling me!
I'm losing to a bird!
You know, we've got to cast that obnoxious little Gargoyle character.
What's his name?
Yeah, Hugo.
While even at the time, Notre Dame de Paris, known in the English-speaking world by its
published English title, The Hunchback of Notre Dame,
seemed an odd choice for Disney Animation to adapt,
it was nothing if not a logical progression,
given the one thing that studio head Jeffrey Katzenberg thirsted for above all else.
Hollywood, that's hooey ballyhooey Hollywood.
In addition to that, this was also with a prescient eye toward Broadway,
with Disney knowing that a successful animated movie can be aged up
for an extremely lucrative theater audience.
Like producer Don Hahn in the 1996 interview with Entertainment Weekly,
in this case, we wanted to push Alan and Stephen to write songs that were more pop opera,
like Les Mis or Phantom of the Opera.
Beauty and the Beast wasn't the first attempt towards a darker, even adult, tone for Disney Animation,
but it was the first that ended up working really, really well and being really, really lucrative.
Then came Pocahontas, and, well, they tried.
You see how I do it, huh?
So, to expand the type of story that Disney dares to adapt,
Katzenberg got the creative heads behind Beauty and the Beast
to adapt a dark novel of great historical importance.
Omelos into a bird!
Back in 1993, Creative Affairs VP David Stanton pitched the idea to Jeffrey Katzenberg
because he was impressed by, quote,
the truly great scenes and affecting storyline, end quote,
he had encountered when he read the classics illustrated comic version as a kid,
and then later the book.
And basically, it seemed like a thrilling challenge for the Disney company
to produce a streamlined, restructured treatment of it.
Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise, fresh off their success directing Beauty and the Beast,
were originally working on a treatment of the Orpheus myth
that was about a whale exploring the ocean,
but Katzenberg quashed that to get them onto Hunchback instead.
And during that time, while we were working on it, we got a call from Jeffrey,
said, guys, drop everything.
You're working on Hunchback now.
Flash forward to 96, people are already getting kind of tired of this whole Disney Renaissance thing.
I like you.
And, lo, the Hunchback of Notre Dame.
All right, all right, pour the wine and cut the cheese.
But, as with Pocahontas, the reception to Hunchback of Notre Dame was...mixed.
At the time, it did not receive great reviews.
And these criticisms were not unwarranted.
Hunchback of Notre Dame had tone problems.
Citizens of Paris, Frollo has persecuted our people, ransacked our city.
Be mine or you will burn.
I'm losing to a bird.
Most people's post-mortem will agree that the centrality of these grotesquely cartoonish gargoyles
in a dark and serious story did far more harm than good.
And despite mandatory toyetic elements, this was an awkward movie to push toys for.
There was criticism of Esmeralda on all sides.
Christian mom groups were more on the Frollo side of things.
So typical of your kind to twist the truth to cloud the mind with unholy thoughts.
While progressives weren't too wild, with Esmeralda being the latest in a string of women of color
who are way more sexualized than their white counterparts.
Look at that disgusting display. Yes, sir.
Quoth Jason Alexander in a 1996 interview with Entertainment Weekly,
Esmeralda is awfully provocative.
She's up there in the Pocahontas category for Babe of the Year.
She is a little more voluptuous than Pokey was.
Pokey?
Pokey?!
But the most common complaint about Hunchback as its fatal flaw is simply the way it changes the source material.
It takes this dirge on the barbarism of human nature in which nearly every named character dies
and turns it into this bright and hopeful inspirational tale about social justice, acceptance,
and the ultimate goodness of humanity.
This, according to some, not only misses the mark of what made Notre Dame de Paris work as a story,
but also completely ruins the spirit of Hugo's work
and completely misses the point of what Hugo's novel was about.
I'm losing to a bird!
And you at home may be wondering,
are you really about to explain why Disney's The Hunchback of Notre Dame actually secretly does
somehow adhere to Victor Hugo's intent?
Well, no. Mostly no.
I'm less interested in Hugo's intent as it pertains to the Disney movie
so much as how it has changed over the decades in various interpretations.
Maybe it has lost Hugo's original intent,
but consider that if this story is to remain relevant,
maybe Hugo's original intent doesn't so much matter as much as the way people reinterpret it.
But you're not like other gypsies. They are evil.
And consider also that Victor Hugo might be okay with that.
This is Notre Dame Cathedral.
Construction began in 1163 after the previous Cathedral of Paris, the 4th century Saint-Étienne,
was allegedly deemed too shabby for its purposes by Bishop Maurice de Sully.
While it was consecrated in the 1180s, construction itself didn't end until 1345.
Notre Dame Cathedral was an engineering marvel.
It is particularly notable in being one of the first uses of flying buttresses.
If I may draw your attention to the flying buttresses.
And this was not originally planned.
Prior to the hunchback of Notre Dame,
the cathedral had survived both a massive vandalization by the Huguenots in 1548
for being deemed an idolatrous armpit.
In 1793, during the French Revolution,
much of the building was damaged and plundered
during its brief conversion into a temple for the Cult of Reason,
a state-sponsored atheistic religion which threw a lit-ass party inside Notre Dame
called the Fete of Reason as a giant f*** you to both the deposed king and to the Catholic Church.
You know the eyes in the Disney movie?
Well, those guys are supposed to be the original kings of Israel,
but the French revolutionaries thought they were supposed to be kings of France
and so they had them all beheaded.
Yeah, that happened.
By the 1830s, Notre Dame was, shall we say, a little busted.
By Victor Hugo's time, the cathedral was over 500 years old.
By now destroyed by the ravages of time, changing governments, and a general lack of care,
young Victor Hugo begins writing Notre Dame de Paris as a point of interest and research for himself,
entertaining the idea that a piece of writing might draw public interest to the building.
So this was before the modern concept of historical preservation,
an idea which really only took hold in Europe,
and especially in the United States after World War II.
This was largely due to this godmotherf***er named Robert Moses,
who was a city planner for New York City.
The original Madison Square Garden, that eyesore, that's not the original.
That was, you know, a mistake by Robert.
It wasn't even 100 years old.
It was, like, maybe 60 years old,
and he just knocked it down because it was inefficient and it was in the way,
and he was like, no, we need to have, like, the avenue open,
so then he knocked it down.
So, out of pure intellectual curiosity,
and, you know, I'm not a big fan of the idea of the cathedral,
So, out of pure intellectual curiosity,
and, you know, a desire for money,
Victor Hugo takes it upon himself to, well...
Educate yourself!
And he falls in love with it.
You know, the building, that is.
While most of what people actually remember about the book
concerns the melodrama of Esmeralda, Frollo, and Quasimodo,
Notre Dame de Paris, the book, is actually a lengthy screed
about the importance of architecture and the way it shapes the lives,
ideas, and culture of those who occupy its spaces.
That, before the printing press and the subsequent rise of literacy came along,
architecture was the dominant way to communicate and dogmatize big ideas
on a wide scale.
That all of the characters in Notre Dame de Paris are stupid,
or victims, or inept, or cruel,
ultimately, that doesn't matter,
because the building outlives and outlasts
any of these individual humans' flaws,
and ultimately weathers all of humanity's flaws,
and is still a much bigger shaper of French cultural identity
than any of these individual people.
So Victor Hugo wants to write a story to spark the public's imagination
and make them fall in love with this piece of history and architecture like he did.
At the time, Hugo was already a successful playwright and essayist,
but with the rise in popularity of this new, exciting form of writing called
the novel, that would earn Hugo international fame.
So in 1828, Hugo signs a contract with publisher Gosselin
to write this book about Notre Dame de Paris
for a really pretty sizable, for that time, advance of 4,000 francs,
with the promise that it would be done in April of 1829.
But like most writers, zing,
Hugo quickly burns through the advance
and puts off writing the book longer and longer
so he can stay in his comfort zone of writing plays.
So time passes, he hasn't really done any work on this book,
but then he goes ahead and starts trying to sell the stage rights
to a completely different publisher,
but then his original publisher that gave him this giant advance
finds out about this and is rightfully really pissed.
So after some negotiating,
Hugo successfully convinces the publisher
to push the publication deadline back to December 30th of 1830.
But then the July Revolution happens because it's France,
and early 19th century France was averaging about one revolution per month,
and Hugo ultimately finishes the novel on January 14th of 1831.
While there were socialist undertones in later adaptations of Notre Dame de Paris,
and even in Hugo's later works,
it's safe to say, you know, he was a businessman,
and if he and Walt Disney had been contemporaries,
they probably would have at least shared a good, firm, respectful handshake.
And if a Burger King commercial where a nine-year-old girl
happily plays with a puppet of Quasimodo seems gauche,
It was Quasimodo!
everything points to this author having dollar signs in his eyes,
or frank signs, before the book was even finished.
If Burger King had existed in 1830s France,
I'm sure all the kids would be wanting a Quasimodo textile mill finger protector.
And then, I got carried away just like Quasimodo.
I'm losing to a bird!
But here's the most important thing for Hugo.
It worked.
Did you just hide a stack of cocaine there?
Through writing this novel and his activism,
Hugo saved Notre Dame.
He woke people up to this historical and architectural marvel sitting in their midst.
And that new consciousness led to an extensive renovation in 1845,
led by V. Le Duc,
including the addition of this spire that Quasimodo sings on,
which was definitely not there in the 14th century.
And that is why Notre Dame Cathedral is the fancy tourist attraction we know and love today.
But the veneration of this building was not the main reason why the book got so big.
So, before we cast dispersions on Disney for changing things,
first we must ask,
what is The Hunchback of Notre Dame about?
While I think it's fair to assume that most modern audiences associate this story
with themes of social justice and progressive societal change,
this is more a product of pop culture adaptations than of the book itself.
More on that later.
The novel concerns itself very little with the plight of marginalized groups,
and has a much darker, more cynical take on society and humanity at large.
Quasimodo is a curmudgeonly lapdog who does Frollo's dirty work for him,
and he's also deaf from those bells,
and does not have the angelic voice of human flower crown Tom Hulse.
Knowing them is they will never know me.
Claude Frollo is a straight-up attempted rapist.
Phoebus resembles Gaston more than any other Disney character.
He's just down to nut, but at the end of the day, Phoebus is only here for Phoebus.
Esmeralda is your basic romantic representation of a Madonna horror trope
sprinkled with some genuinely harmful racism that gets buried in later adaptations.
You find out at the end that Esmeralda isn't really Romani.
She's actually a white girl who was stolen as a baby.
Yeah.
Yeah, they cut that out in the Disney movie.
Yes, good. Thank you, Disney.
Stay away, child. They're gypsies.
Esmeralda is reunited with her birth mother,
who is also a wayfish, tragic, driven mad by having lost her baby,
right before both characters die horribly.
In fact, everybody dies horribly, except for Phoebus,
and a not-so-subtle stand-in character for Victor Hugo,
Pierre Gringoire, who was cut from the Disney movie.
He is a poet, and at the end of the novel,
when given the choice to save the life of either Esmeralda or the goat,
but not both, he saves the goat.
Yeah, the goat lives. And yes, the goat was created by Victor Hugo, not Disney.
The main plot that takes up most adaptations that we know
is the background noise to Hugo's main point,
which can be summed up with the following excerpt.
Our readers must excuse us if we stop a moment
to investigate the enigmatic words of the archdeacon.
This will kill that. The book will kill the edifice.
Victor Hugo's book was mainly concerned with how the printed press,
and subsequently, mass literacy,
would kill what he perceived as the original common language, architecture.
So the themes we, the modern audience, have come to associate
with The Hunchback of Notre Dame,
whether everyone lives at the end or not,
these were not themes that were necessarily present in the original novel.
The original novel was not terribly concerned
with the plight of the marginalized or the abused.
Victor Hugo was so unconcerned with the main melodrama, we know,
that when the original English-language translator,
Frederic Chaubert, switched the title from Notre Dame de Paris
to The Hunchback of Notre Dame,
essentially because it sounded, I don't know,
more tantalizing to English-speaking audiences,
Hugo was notoriously pissed off.
So there's an interesting irony in a book that says,
this will kill that, the book will kill the edifice.
Its original meaning and intent will get killed off by...
Visual Mass Media!
One does not go from a dark and violent story
about fate and death of the church to...
Omelos into a bird!
...so easily.
Let's look at a few examples.
La Esmeralda was an opera written in 1836,
and if you're wondering why this production that I pulled
looks like a production of Rent with priests in it,
I kind of wonder that too.
This opera failed in a big way,
so it doesn't get like 600 productions a year like La Bohème does.
La Esmeralda has a much less dour ending than the book.
Censors demanded that every reference to Claude Frollo
being a priest be removed, and lo,
the framework of modern adaptation begins.
Quasimodo in this version was shunted to minor character status,
and while Phoebus ends up dying a noble death because of love,
La Esmeralda survives.
And this stage adaptation was written by...
Victor Hugo?
Yeah.
Even though this version is largely forgotten by history,
it is relevant because we already see the author actively engaged
in rewriting his own book for a mass visual consumption
and boulderizing its own message to make it palatable for a larger audience.
I've got a hunch this bites.
La Esmeralda was followed by multiple adaptations over the following decades,
and the material was retrofitted again with the rise of film,
including one version directed by Alice Guy-Blanche in 1905.
But for the purposes of this video,
let's skip ahead in time to the 1923 Hollywood movie starring Lon Chaney,
the first adaptation that was a massive success.
Not only did this film bring Hunchback back to the popular consciousness in a big way,
it also positioned Quasimodo as one of the original universal movie monsters.
Lon Chaney wanted to be Quasimodo to the point where he was actually looking
to form his own production company for the sole purpose of getting this movie made.
Producer Irving Thalberg had been wanting to make a big production
that was more epic and adult than the usual universal fare,
and pitched it to studio head Carl Laemmle as a love story,
and thus the Hunchback of Notre Dame tragic love story entered the public consciousness.
The film banked a record $3 million,
and got the ball rolling in this conga line of film versions,
and why you will eventually have to sit through the Dark Universe version
of Hunchback starring Ansel Elgort in 2021.
I hope. Please God, let it happen. I want it.
Frollo is still not a priest, although his brother Jehan, a minor character in the book, is.
And Phoebus is good now.
Quasimodo dies at the end so the breeding pair can go forth unfettered,
because he is an uggo and, well, really,
this is about as nice of a monster as you were going to get out of a 1923 movie.
But all in all, despite this being one of the last big versions with the Esmeralda racism reveal,
it's still fairly conventional 1920s fluff.
But already in 1923, we have lost any real connection to Victor Hugo's message
about the novel destroying the edifice.
Because visual mass media has destroyed the novel.
No, no, no. Don't spoil the fun, Frollo. Stay here.
In 1939, Hollywood producer Pandro S. Berman demanded an exact remake of the Lon Chaney film,
reusing a majority of the sets from the 1923 version.
William Dieterle, already a successful director in his own right before fleeing Nazi Germany,
delivered on this for Berman.
Charles Lawton starred, delivering a truly memorable performance as Quasimodo.
Why was I not made of stone like thee?
And at Lawton's own behest, they brought in relative newcomer Maureen O'Hara to star as Esmeralda,
who in this version is not a stolen white baby, but actually Romani.
So... I'm not sure where this falls in the whitewashing conversation, but there you go.
She's a gypsy, sir.
Who cares about her race? She's pretty.
And it is this version more than any other, including the original novel,
that Disney borrows from the most.
There is also a very sharp humanist lean into the concept of justice in regard to people versus buildings in history.
Esmeralda in this version isn't just some innocent hottie who wanders into misfortune by pure bad luck.
She literally breaks into the city of Paris, where the Romani have been actively banned from,
to plead with the king of France to let her people live freely.
They tell me gypsies are a lot of thieves.
That's not true, your majesty.
Whenever we steal, it's because we're hungry.
My people have good hearts, and we love you.
You have a good heart too, sir, because you've promised to help us.
It is also one of the rare versions where the Romani are not demonized in some way, shape, or form.
Still looking at you, Disney.
The lame can walk.
And the blind can see.
But the dead don't talk.
Their plight is just that, a plight.
Why do you stop us?
Because no gypsies can enter Paris any longer without a permit.
It's the new law.
If the others cannot too, why can't we?
They are Frenchmen. You're gypsies. Foreigners.
You came yesterday, we come today.
The movie is constantly reminding us that the lives of innocent, persecuted people are at stake.
The Esmeralda, Quasimodo, Frollo melodrama that everyone loves is still in there, sure,
but there is an active undercurrent in this movie that ties in with bigger struggles
that isn't just an old building that has weathered time.
The Hunchback of Notre Dame was the only film that was screened in Cannes that year,
a film festival which was itself created in opposition to the fascist presence at the Venice Film Festival.
So that a movie that features the Romani as a persecuted underclass
while Hitler was gearing up to slaughter hundreds of thousands of them
at a festival that was created to oppose Nazism,
there's something incredibly powerful in that.
Something that has nothing to do with Hugo's original intent.
So with the success of this movie, and it was a huge success,
we gain the justice for the oppressed theme which plays very heavily into the Disney version.
So in a lot of ways, this adaptation is certainly the most cohesive,
and it is telling that many future adaptations try to mimic the anti-fascist theming,
Justice!
while at the same time not always grasping it.
We find you totally innocent.
Which is the worst crime of all.
So you're going to pay!
So, it's 1992, and Disney is plotting out its five-year plan for the conquest of Earth
after the staggering success of Aladdin, Beauty and the Beast, and The Little Mermaid.
If Disney wants to adapt Notre Dame de Paris, which version do they really want to adapt?
Right off the bat, it's fallacious to look at Disney's The Hunchback of Notre Dame
as an adaptation of the original novel,
because that read ignores a whole century and a half of filmmakers recontextualizing the story for each new generation.
Again, the idea for the Disney movie didn't come from the original novel,
but from a picture book adaptation of it.
And even if the original Notre Dame de Paris was as close to perfection as the early novel could get,
film is just a different medium.
It's a common fallacy that adaptational changes happen
because greedy filmmakers want to bastardize and water down a beloved creation
to get as many butts in seats as possible.
Why, I'm the Captain the Hat!
And well, that is sometimes true,
but just as often it's changing the story to fit a visually temporally locked medium.
Yes, sometimes adaptations are cheap cash-ins,
but it is just inaccurate to assume that all Hollywood adaptations are
when there are often teams of artists that care deeply about making the best product possible,
which usually means changing some stuff.
But more to the point, aside from the fact that the Disney movie changes the ending in a big way,
and that's the aspect that people tend to focus on,
what did it really change?
Rather, the real question is, what versions did Disney pull from?
Because the real originality is in the aesthetics, the music, the visuals,
not so much the story.
That Frollo is no longer a priest comes from Hugo himself in La Esmeralda.
Same with Phoebus being a good guy and not everybody dying.
And that theme of justice for the oppressed,
well, we can thank Charles Laughton and a German filmmaker fleeing the Nazis for that.
The God Help the Outcast musical number pulls heavily from this scene in the 1939 version.
Give me a rich husband. Give me many admirers. Give me beauty.
Give me a rich highness. Give me peace of mind.
Give me happiness. Take all I have. But please help my people.
I ask for nothing. I can get by.
Please help my people, the poor and downtrod.
Or this scene of Phoebus rallying the citizens of Paris.
Citizens of Paris.
Parisians! Parisians!
That also borrows from Gringoire doing similar in the 1939 movie.
But let's take a look at what the themes of the Disney movie even are.
I think Esmeralda put it best.
Justice!
First, there is the theme of oppression and injustice.
Judge Claude Frollo longed to purge the world of vice and sin.
Interrupt judge Claude Frollo begins the film by way of unjust oppression.
And for one time in his life of power and control,
Frollo felt a twinge of fear for his immortal soul.
What must I do?
Then there's the theme of humility before God,
and that Notre Dame itself acts as a sort of embodiment of God.
You never can run from nor hide what you've done from the eyes.
The very eyes of Notre Dame.
By basically embodying injustice, Frollo positions himself as an enemy of God.
But that Quasimodo embodies justice positions him as almost angelic.
Observe the contradiction between heaven's light...
I swear it must be heaven's light.
And hellfire.
Like fire, hellfire.
But the unique thematic element in the Disney movie is this.
Who is the monster and who is the man?
This idea is present to some extent in all of the versions,
but the Disney version is the first to put this theme of internal versus external monsterhood front and center.
You are deformed.
I am deformed.
And you are ugly.
And I am ugly.
Quasimodo, and indeed everyone but Esmeralda, take it for granted that he is a monster, you know.
I am a monster, you know.
Because of the way that he looks.
But it is Frollo who is the monster.
The most monstrous character Disney has ever created.
It's not my fault.
I'm not to blame.
Because he is much more grounded and real than any other Disney villain.
This, aside from the general quality of the writing, is what makes hellfire so brilliant.
Protect me, Maria.
Don't let the siren cast her spell.
Don't let her fire sear my flesh and bone.
Unlike other Disney villain songs where they're just singing about how being evil is fun...
An even grimmer plot has been simmering in my great criminal brain.
Hellfire is about the anguish it causes him to be the way that he is.
It's not my fault.
If in God's plan, he made the devil so much stronger than a man.
Said Kirk Wise in a 1996 Chicago Tribune article,
As we were exploring the characters, especially Frollo,
we certainly found a lot of historical parallels to the type of mania he had.
The Confederate South, Nazi Germany, take your pick.
And it is in their interactions with Esmeralda that their relative monsterhood is revealed.
I am a monster, you know.
So, yeah, hold on, I am about to defend this creative decision, bear with me.
I remember even back in 1996 hearing the argument where if differently abled kids should see themselves just as valuable as everyone else,
then why doesn't Quasimodo get the girl at the end?
To which I would respond, A, getting the girl as a reward should never be the goal.
And let her taste the fires of hell, or else let her be mine and mine alone.
And B, it's what sets Quasimodo apart from Frollo.
He accepts and values Esmeralda's friendship,
but he's also able to let her go so she can be with the guy who was basically an accessory to genocide up until about five minutes ago.
He's fine with it.
He's fine.
Really.
He's fine.
See?
He's fine.
He's fine.
It's fine.
It's fine.
This is fine.
It's fine.
See again that contrast between heaven's light and hell fire, both of which revolve around Esmeralda.
Esmeralda gives Quasimodo positive attention, and that's the first time he's ever experienced that.
Do you think I'm evil?
No.
No, no, you were kind and good and...
And a gypsy.
And maybe Frollo's wrong about the both of us.
And his hope is that she might one day love him.
I dare to dream that she might even care for me.
But Frollo's position is, if I can't have her, literally possess her, no one can.
Destroy Esmeralda and let her taste the fires of hell, or else let her be mine and mine alone.
So this is the binary between a monster and a man.
Quasimodo respects Esmeralda's autonomy and he lets her go.
Frollo would rather die.
So, this is fine.
He's fine.
It's fine.
He's fine.
This is fine.
It's fine.
He's fine.
This is fine.
It's fine.
Don't worry, they give him a hot, clumsy girlfriend in the sequel.
Was it just a lucky day?
That he turned and looked my way?
And on that same token, that's part of why Quasimodo needs to not die at the end of this version.
Losing his love, either to someone else or to death by hanging, doesn't kill him.
Part of Quasimodo's goodness stems from him being stronger than that.
And rather than getting a sexy lamp as a reward, he finds happiness in being accepted by the people,
which is maybe a touch unrealistic, but certainly a better message than either dying or getting a sexy lamp as a reward.
And to be clear, Esmeralda in this version is super proactive and not a sexy lamp.
And Quasimodo, unlike Frollo, does not see women as possessions.
But there's a lot going on here that kind of gets buried under the criticism that they changed the ending and therefore softened it.
Even with the damned gargoyles in the picture, the overall dark tone kind of worked against the movie's favorability ratings.
Even at the time, a huge part of the confused reaction was the distance between the marketing...
I think the cavalry's here!
This coming summer, experience the adventure.
Sit.
Mom and dad had a special surprise waiting for me.
It was Quasimodo!
You are deformed.
I am deformed.
And you are ugly.
And I am ugly.
And these are crimes for which the world shows little pity.
Partly because people thought it was too serious and too dark.
Now your kids can get all four puppets.
Take them from her.
This is an unholy demon. I'm sending it back to hell.
The marketing department at that time thought, well, we'll maybe fool people into thinking that it's a lighthearted, happy Disney.
And then I got carried away just like Quasimodo.
They'll play up the gargoyles and they'll play up the feast of fools.
And so all the marketing at that time was, it's a celebration. It's a festival.
It took nearly 20 years before we saw that coveted stage musical,
and with it attempts to address some of the criticism about the weird tonal dissonance in the Disney movie by sticking closer to the original novel.
It ran in Germany for several years before premiering with a revised book in America,
with performances in San Diego and at the Paper Mill Playhouse in New Jersey.
It never made it to Broadway and probably never will for...
union reasons.
I'll just leave it at that.
Union stuff.
The American production goes even darker, sticking much closer to the Everybody Dies ending,
but I'd argue it ends up being less enjoyable than the movie because it runs into the same tone problem, but now in the opposite direction.
It builds on the same foundation as the movie, but then it has a different payoff that isn't really built to.
It's different, not better.
It was less successful, however, than the most financially lucrative non-English language musical in history,
Notre Dame de Paris, the French Quebecois musical,
which, while one of the more accurate adaptations of Hunchback...
Well, if your cheese is three men wailing melodramatically over a hot lady to a Chris Isaac song by way of spa music,
then Notre Dame de Paris is for you.
There's always a desire to tell and retell popular stories.
This is how we share and create culture.
In some ways, this is the reason why culture even exists.
So it's important to understand not just that stories sometimes change, but why.
The changes to Disney's Hunchback of Notre Dame weren't just rooted in the fact that it's Disney and we can't just kill everybody.
And yet it's a lot lighter than the novel.
Oh, absolutely. In the novel, everybody dies.
Although that is certainly a part of it.
Changes to narratives over time are inevitable.
And in the case of Notre Dame de Paris, it's because sometimes problems actually do get addressed.
Historical preservation wasn't really a thing in the 1830s, especially in France.
But now it's hard to imagine a France where historical preservation isn't a huge priority.
And a lot of that is thanks to Victor Hugo.
Several years before publishing Notre Dame de Paris, Hugo wrote an essay called War on the Demolishers, in which he stated,
The hammer that is mutilating the face of the country must be stopped.
One law would suffice. Let us pass it.
Whatever the property rights may be, we must not allow the destruction of a historical and monumental edifice
by these ignoble speculators whose honor has been blinded by self-interest.
We would want to reconstruct these prodigious edifices, but we would not be able to.
We no longer possess the genius of centuries past.
Industry has replaced art.
We can't step into the reality where Hugo never existed, so we will never know.
But it is fair to say that if not for the hunchback of Notre Dame, Notre Dame Cathedral might not even be there today.
Or at least, it would still be pretty busted.
But we live in a world now, in Europe anyway, where Hugo's primary concern was solved.
So if this story is going to stick around, it needs a new concern.
A more humanist one.
Hugo's writing changed priorities as the priorities of the time he was living in changed.
And I think that shift in perspective is no better illustrated than in Hugo's other great work, Les Miserables,
which takes a wildly different attitude on the value of human life.
Les Mis's theme is that individual lives, though crushed by an unjust system, do matter,
and the choices of individuals do affect history.
Just look at the kindly bishop who didn't turn in Jean Valjean at the beginning of the novel,
and gave him a second chance, and how Jean Valjean uses that second chance to better the lives of others.
This is a primary theme of Les Mis, human goodness overcoming unjust systems.
So Notre Dame de Paris gets this sort of makeover where it's sort of making the same point as Les Mis,
justice for the oppressed.
True monstrousness is not a reflection of how society sees you, or what you look like.
And inhumanly strong protagonists. Hugo was a big fan of those.
If you want to decry the Disney movie for the changes they made to make it kid-friendly, well, that's fine.
But if one calls out the happy ending because it blunts the original misanthropic tone of the novel,
but doesn't call out the anti-inequality or social justice aspects, well, it's not only missing the forest for the trees,
but it's also a rather shallow reading and omits basically all of the context in history.
And yeah, part of that is just Disney being Disney, but part of that is what we need now.
Like Hugo making a point about the historical importance of the building was what we needed in the 1830s.
Quasimodo has gone from pitiable wretch and tool of the system to a movie monster,
and then back to pitiable wretch but nicer this time, and then all the way to hero of his own story.
It's also noteworthy how really the Disney version is the only version that explores how abusive and weird Quasimodo's relationship with Frollo is,
and has him overcoming it.
All my life you have told me that the world is a dark, cruel place,
but now I see that the only thing dark and cruel about it is people like you.
And it really is remarkable that Disney had a protagonist with a legit physical deformity.
And I don't mean, like, beastly deformity.
I can't think of another kids movie that does that except, well, arguably Shrek,
and Shrek, well, Shrek looks like 90% of stand-up comedians.
This movie was the first that went into production after Aladdin was a huge success,
and it shows with these forced comedy elements that have only aged more poorly over time.
Fly, my pretty, fly, fly!
And improvising Robin Williams is not the same as Jason Alexander.
All right, all right! Pour the wine and cut the cheese!
Disservice though it may have been to this movie,
Disney did eventually relearn that not all sidekicks have to be voiced by comedians.
Eventually.
But in a lot of ways, Disney's Hunchback of Notre Dame was ahead of its time.
It's still a hot mess.
Easy as it is to say, it's great, except for the gargoyles.
The gargoyles are still there.
Yet it's still a cut above what people give it credit for,
and I think it would be more appreciated if it came out today,
because we need stories like this today.
Fashy abuse of Frollo, justice for the oppressed,
the focus on how some men really do loathe the objects of their desire,
the wholesale demonization of ethnic groups.
For 20 years I have been taking care of the gypsies, one by one.
Maybe this movie wasn't really appreciated in its time because it didn't resonate as much in 1996,
but it does resonate more in 2017.
So if you haven't seen it in a while, give it a watch.
And watch it in Dolby 5.1 HD if you can.
Enjoy the sweeping vistas, the revolutionary CGI,
Alan Menken's best score for a Disney movie, that's right, I said it, don't at me,
and consider that, hokey though it may be at points,
like Hugo's message about the importance of architecture in the 1830s,
this might be what we need in our time.
Most of it.
Most of it.
