So in a way I regard it as beneath my dignity to make a video about Milo Yiannopoulos, but
some things being beneath my dignity has never been enough to stop me before, and it certainly
isn't going to stop me now.
I say beneath my dignity because I don't really think Milo is a serious person, or as I am
very serious.
I'm serious!
I'm serious!
The news calls Milo a provocateur, but I'm starting to think that provocateur is just
a pretentious word for asshole.
What Milo really is is a preening, narcissistic no-face whose main infatuation is with his
own minor celebrity.
He's an opportunist who gained fame by championing gamergate, though he clearly has nothing but
disdain for gamers who he consistently characterizes as beta male manbabies.
He's now taking after his friend Dan Coulter and making a career out of saying false and
immoral things to get negative attention from easily offended liberals, something that any
12-year-old with a Twitter account could do.
His articles and speeches blend generic right-wing babble with exaggerated attacks on feminists,
Black Lives Matter, and transgender and fat people.
All this is plastered over with a thin layer of homosexual glamour, which in this case
means calling feminists darling and dressing like he made his first thousand dollars 12
minutes ago.
When he was banned last week on Twitter for his borderline racist participation in an
extremely racist mob attack on Leslie Jones, his poor duped fans tweeted "#FreeMilo," and
complained about Orwellian censorship, while Milo himself bragged about the long-anticipated
ban which he celebrated as the latest victory in his war against people not paying attention
to him.
I just got banned from Twitter!
All of this is pretty typical of the tedious reality TV type circus that American politics
has become.
But what I find interesting is that a lot of people seem to be really attracted to Milo,
even people who are somewhat sympathetic to social justice, and I'd like to talk about
why that is.
I've spoken to some Milo fans, and they all tell me they like him because he's funny and
fabulous and contrarian.
But is he?
His humor mostly seems to consist in the most primitive sort of insults and put-downs.
This is what men drink!
I do man stuff!
Now there is a venerable tradition of bitchy gay humor.
It was cruel, capricious, dark.
But Milo really doesn't belong to that tradition.
Great gay humorists like Crisp or David Sedaris use self-deprecation to balance out the bitchiness,
and they have a sense of the tragic.
It's the human condition, or the homosexual condition, that's often the butt of the jokes.
It's a little like Jewish humor that way.
And you know, Milo is also Jewish.
I mean, what the hell is going on here?
A gay Jew!
You'd think he'd be guaranteed to be funny.
But Milo has been seduced by the brutal, Hitlerian charm of Donald Trump, and in consequence
his humor is essentially self-aggrandizement at other people's expense.
I am perfectly happy to be your martyr in this.
But despite all that, there is one talking point Milo has that is very interesting to
me, and I think it might help explain why people are attracted to him.
Again and again, Milo suggests that what's great about him, and about the Republican
Party that he delusionally imagines could be crafted in his image, is that he's fun
and fabulous and glamorous.
His one criticism of the left that I think is genuine is his complaint that they're
joyless and humorless, and that they resent glamour and excess.
And you know, as much as I hate to admit it, he actually has a bit of a point.
Now I say this on the basis of my own experience with academic feminism, which in general does
tend to be a little dour and joyless.
It sounds like a frivolous objection, but I want to argue that it actually matters.
For instance, I sometimes try to put myself in the headspace of the people who just despise
Anita Sarkeesian.
Honestly, I have no serious beef with Anita.
I have some quibbles about some of the games that she chooses as examples, but I don't
really disagree with the substance of what she says.
But some people fucking hate Anita.
Why is that?
Well, apart from the obvious misogynist contingent, I guess it's that life is shit, and work
is hard, and gamers don't want to come home at the end of the day and have this brow-furrowing
moralist tell them that their one little solace is problematic.
And you know, I kind of get that.
Now to be fair to Anita, she does occasionally say,
But remember that it's both possible, and even necessary, to simultaneously enjoy media
while also being critical of its more problematic or pernicious aspects.
But if you interpret feminism badly, you could get the impression that what feminists want
is this bleak world where everyone goes around critiquing things, and there's no room left
for spontaneity or irony or joy or sex or art.
And although I think this is of course a terrible misunderstanding, I also think that sometimes
academic feminists are not the best at discouraging it.
My main issue with Anita, for example, isn't about what she says, but about her style.
And I don't mean the way she dresses.
I actually think she looks cute.
CONFESS!
I CONFESS!
I mean the way she presents her ideas.
You've got no style, Anita, no style!
Your videos are whiny, and academic, and boring.
You bypass valuable opportunities to make furry jokes, you mispronounce and then translate
French clichés.
C'est raison d'être, or reason for existence.
See?
I can be a bitch.
You people think being a bitch is funny?
I'll bitch all over your goddamn nips!
What I'm suggesting is being on the right side of politics and morality isn't the only
thing that matters in life.
Now I'm about to get very philosophical about this, so you might want to grab your fedora.
I want to propose that there are two principles that contribute to the good life, which I'll
call the moral and the aesthetic.
This is similar to a distinction made by another philosopher, but I'm not going to use his
terms because they're too pretentious to say in a YouTube video, and because I am a much
better philosopher than him.
The moral principle includes things like reason, logic, and judgments about right and wrong.
The aesthetic principle includes things like style, humor, irony, and creativity.
Without a balance between the two principles, you can't really live a full human life.
If you're too dominated by the moral principle, you become dry, lifeless, and negative, at
worst a kind of puritan or fanatic.
If you're too dominated by the aesthetic principle, you become shallow, self-centered, hedonistic,
and empty.
Anita's public persona has too much of the moralist.
Milo has too much of the esthi- Well, Milo has too much of the esthi.
But note that an esthi without morality is actually bad esthi.
Milo thinks he's Oscar Wilde, but he's not.
He's fucking Dorian Gray.
He's a vain shell of a man, because he has no real moral sense.
You know, you can do something because it's interesting, but that doesn't make it a good
thing to do, like taking psychedelic drugs at Dave and Buster's.
Is this what eternity feels like?
Because I want out, God.
I want out.
Also, there's something missing in a moralist with no style, or something almost inhumane
about it.
What YouTube needs, what humanity needs, is someone who can balance the two principles.
Moral and aesthetic, light and dark, male and female, drunkenness and robo-tripping,
ready and baw-me.
Oh my God.
I am the chosen one.
It is I who must bring balance to the force.
I am God.
If you liked this video, please click more things.
Patron J. Michael Comfort wants to know, if Anita Sarkeesian was a Pokemon, which would
she be?
Well, at first I was thinking she was Meowth, because she's good at generating coins.
Or Pikachu, because she won't be contained by Pokeballs or patriarchy.
But to me, she'll always be Marowak, because she's my perfect dark mother, and someday
I will avenge her.
