This video is an offshoot from the video I made about Bloodborne.
I realized partway through recording it that attempts to defend and talk up Dark Souls 2
were worming their way into the Bloodborne video,
so instead of making the Bloodborne video even longer,
I decided to cut those parts out and then put them in their own video.
Then I realized this video made no sense
because it was just a mishmash of stuff lifted from a different video
pasted together without context,
so I remade it all, which took bloody ages.
This game is unfairly maligned.
I think Dark Souls 1 was incredible,
and people who really liked that one had kind of unrealistic expectations
and got inevitably burned by the sequel being different
or failing to be as spectacular and new as its predecessor when it came out.
Judging it as a game, I think it's really good.
It's not as good as Bloodborne,
but it's a little bit...
It's a little bit better than Dark Souls 1.
Oh, I mean, in my opinion, it's a little bit better than Dark Souls 1.
Okay, it's about as good as Dark Souls 1,
but it has some differences I prefer.
Okay, it's not as good as Dark Souls 1,
but the changes were an interesting and useful risk
that's more valuable existing than not existing
and is genuinely better than just getting more of Dark Souls 1,
which we already have and you can still just go back to and play if you want to.
And I personally think I had more fun with it.
I think the Emerald Herald is a better waifu than Guinevere.
♪
We might as well start with a discussion of the health system,
which I feel is the core building block of the Souls games
because it dictates the rhythm and structure of the gameplay
and creates the weighty sense of challenge and difficulty the series is known for.
Ironically, it's very easy to just make something hard.
Making a game challenging while also being fun
requires a very dense and carefully arranged interplay of mechanics.
This is the tightrope games have to walk.
How do you make a player feel challenged
so that their success is a rewarding experience
without making them feel overly punished or simply frustrated?
This balance is difficult to execute.
The reason Souls games are difficult in the first place
is because of the way damage works in the games.
If everything was the same,
but all attacks did a half or a quarter the damage they do,
the game would be fundamentally different,
less challenging, and less fun as a result.
Things wouldn't be as weighty because the damage wasn't as important
and dodging wouldn't feel as necessary and so on.
This is why a lot of first-person shooters
have a difficulty mode they explicitly recommend over the others
because games usually manipulate difficulty
by making the damage sliders be higher or lower
and in most games there's a specific amount of damage
attacks are most enjoyable to be working with.
Souls games have no difficulty setting
because there's almost no way to make the game easier
without fundamentally altering the thing that makes the games fun.
In a Souls game, you generally can only take a couple of hits before dying.
Healing, therefore, is an important mechanic.
How do you let the player gain health back?
This is an important mechanic to talk about
because it defines the flow of the rest of the ensuing game experience.
Let's say there was no healing whatsoever
or you healed instantly without there even being an animation
or, as in Bloodborne,
you could heal back damage you took if you retaliated quickly.
These utterly change the rest of the mechanics
and therefore the rest of the game experience
because they change how the player is led to interact with them.
The guy who gets to decide how players get health back
actually is responsible for more of the game
than the people who design the levels in a weird way.
Souls games have done this a variety of ways
with a variety of impacts on core gameplay.
In Demon's Souls, you healed by using different kinds of grass you found or purchased.
Stopping to grab a bite, however, was very slow and deliberate
and it stopped you dead in your tracks.
While this is fine if you already beat the thing that damaged you,
in a lot of direct combat situations,
stopping to heal is either not going to work or is going to get you killed.
It's a calculated risk every time
and in boss fights, finding places in the rhythm of the battle
when healing was a good idea
was key to survival for people who couldn't always avoid taking that damage.
There is something of a downside to this, however.
Firstly, while it is very calculated and purposeful and challenging to heal,
should it be?
It's fair, but is it good to be in a situation
where the most pressing thing, trying to heal,
is a really bad idea that would itself kill you?
A lot of early players die while mashing the heal button.
That's not fun,
even if simply not doing that is technically the sound response.
Secondly, in Demon's Souls,
you immediately have access to all the healing items you'll ever need.
You can buy as many of them as you want
as soon as the game properly starts and always go back for more
and they're fairly easy to farm from enemies.
This means that if they master the timing to heal in battle,
they're practically unkillable
and can't be worn down by attrition as they progress to a level.
As long as no one encounter can fully drain your life bar,
which can still happen a lot,
Demon's Souls' difficulty is reduced quite a bit
from where it was probably meant to be.
You technically have access to an infama-
Infama?
Infinite amount of life as long as you use it properly.
Dark Souls replaced this health system entirely with the Estus Flask,
a healing item which you couldn't buy more of.
You had a limited amount of uses
which recharged at bonfires or when you died.
Yes, I know you can also get health back by using a humanity,
but doing that burns such a rare resource
that I couldn't really regard it as a source of healing
unless you're one of those good-at-Dark-Souls people I've heard so much about.
This meant you had a finite amount of life at any given time.
This also means attrition becomes a factor.
Damage you take is health you aren't getting back
until you reach a place that restores Estus.
This can make the game more interesting and more risky.
It also means that there's a net maximum amount of times
you can possibly be hit by enemies or a boss in a single run.
In this regard, Dark Souls is tremendously more difficult,
but also more satisfying because of the new element of challenge it adds.
However, you're still left basically prone while you do it,
and it still takes just long enough that getting killed
while trying to heal is an annoying and common possibility.
And it means if you're on a run to a boss
and you take a certain amount of damage,
you feel like you're already doomed on this run
because there's no way you can get past them
with that little health remaining,
so you have to go back or just go on a doomed run
and die and come back again.
And that can kind of wear down your ability
to keep playing the game and enjoy it,
which is a big deal in games.
Dark Souls 2, in my opinion, fixes some of this pretty well.
Firstly, it takes an age to drink again,
making it even more deliberate than the Demon's Souls one,
and your health actually recovers over a very short amount of time
instead of instantaneously.
This forces the player to not even consider healing
until they're free and clear
because there's no chance they'll just get the Estus to their lips
before getting hit and stay alive.
Ironically, by being even more slow and deliberate,
it further disencourages the thing that causes annoyance
when it doesn't work, dying while trying to heal.
However, Dark Souls 2 also supplements this with life gems.
Life gems are a little bit like the grass,
down to being purchasable and coming in numerous sizes.
They take a while to use, and they heal over time very slowly.
This is genius.
You see, attrition isn't necessarily a fun kind of challenge.
It can create a nice feeling
and a risk that you'll be worn down too far to make it anywhere,
but you know what isn't fun?
Knowing you're definitely fucked
because you'll most likely lose the remaining health you have
before you get anywhere new.
Knowing you're at the limit your healing can possibly take you
with your abilities and you're just not good enough
and you're gonna have to keep playing this area over and over
or go farming and level up or something.
By bringing back theoretically infinite health
but making it heal very slowly,
the creators have introduced a way to get around this annoyance
without making the player feel totally invincible.
They also have tactical uses.
Since they take a while to use and are slow,
they're risky to use in fights,
but if you're good at not immediately dying,
they still heal you,
so you can run out of Estus and still have access to a source of healing
that requires some skill to use effectively,
which is kind of cool and smart.
They're also useful for if you expect to take damage
but don't think you'll be able to stop and heal later.
In some boss fights, using a gem when you get the chance
and then attacking means you'll get some health back
even if you get hit a bit later.
This is frankly a welcome addition.
I've heard the criticism that the addition of life gems
utterly destroys the delicate balance of the entire game
and it's erased the majesty of the Estus flask
and its purposeful limitation of a player's maximum amount of mistakes.
This, in a sense, is an accurate analysis.
The balance is shifted.
However, it's shifted in favor of the player
in a way that's overall positive for the experience.
Bloodborne probably does the best with its use of healing.
Blood vials are simultaneously infinite and finite.
You can buy a bunch quite easily
but only have 20 on hand at any time.
The more you find in a level are immediately usable
if you had less than 20 on you,
so you can use more than 20 if you use one in a fight
and then one drops from a corpse later,
which happens fairly often.
The healing is also quicker
and you have a lot of control over movement while you do it.
This is good.
I just talked about how good it was being made tactical
the way it was in 2,
but ultimately, as a mechanic,
I think it's more enjoyable to be able to heal quickly
because dying while healing
or dying because you were unable to heal
because tactically it would have killed you
is just never fun or interesting.
If I was to grade all four games' healing methods,
I would put Dark Souls last here
because I don't personally think its method of attrition
is all that fun when it comes down to it
and the precise amount of time it takes to heal
and the way it immobilizes you
makes it always a tantalizing risk
you think you might just be able to make,
which means more players die
trying to heal in this game than any other.
I think Dark Souls 2 is the second best behind Bloodborne
and, hey, that's pretty good.
♪♪
One criticism I see made a lot about Dark Souls 2
is that a lot of the bosses and also a lot of enemies
are what amounts to humanoid people in armor.
This isn't just an aesthetic complaint.
It's also a problem in the sense
that a lot of the fights with enemies
amount to learning how they swing a weapon,
how to get past their weapon,
and which direction their swings go.
And since there's a finite amount of ways
a humanoid can swing a sword,
it's possible to even start confusing enemies
and their attacks for each other.
A lot of bosses are very similar,
unlike the previous game,
which has more of a variety of unique bosses
like the gaping dragon or Nito
or Seath the Scaleless breaking up the monotony.
And indeed, there are quite a lot of humanoid opponents
who fight with swords in what amounts to a duel.
But here's the thing.
I'm gonna make a different argument here.
I'm not gonna argue that the bosses
are all sufficiently different,
which, in my opinion, they are,
or that there are plenty of different kinds of boss fight
breaking up the monotony,
which there is,
but instead I'm going to play the wild card
and be the needless contrarian that people say I am.
I'm gonna argue in favor of dudes in armor.
I think the best kinds of fight in games
are against enemies on roughly equal footing
with the player.
All games, not just Souls games.
There's something viscerally satisfying
about facing off with someone
making use of the same skill set as you.
The best boss fights in Devil May Cry
are the fights against Vergil or Dante
or another human-sized opponent
with another ridiculous sword.
The best boss fight in God Hand
and also gaming history
is against Azel, who has the Devil Hand, and so on.
It's far more compelling to fight a person
making use of skills you yourself could be using
than someone with far more powers than you
or who is an incomprehensible mess.
It feels good, to put it simply.
Dark Souls had a couple of regular enemies in the game
who scratched this itch for me,
like, uh, the NPC invasions,
like Manny to Mildred,
uh, Lautrec,
the crestfallen guy when he goes hollow,
or Oscar when you return to the asylum,
or Rickard.
These kinds of fight are the best
and most memorable.
In fact, I just remember those offhand.
I didn't even put those in the script.
I just decided to list them
because I just know them all.
PvP is so fun in these games
for this exact reason.
You're fighting people on the same footing as you
with access to the same resources.
It's just great.
It's- it's a puzzle
where you all pick your poison
and then you fight to see who is poisoned the most.
Um...
But in Dark Souls, the only boss fight
that comes really close to getting this right
is Artorias in the DLC.
Ornstein and S-
mmm...
kind of did it,
but you were too busy dealing with the other guy,
uh,
so you could never really focus
on the aspect of the fight
that's like this straightforward, cool duel, you know?
And then they get really big
and then it becomes a very different kind of thing.
Artorias is a really, really good fight.
He's not exactly on equal footing with you.
He's presented as a very strong person,
larger than life, literally,
corrupted by evil,
but he's a brilliant fight
because he never comes off as ridiculous.
He even dodges and rolls the way a person would.
You get this fantastic mix of outsmarting
a fellow consciousness
trying to beat you in a straight fight,
Before Dark Souls 2,
I would describe Knight Artorias
as the platonic ideal
of a Dark Souls boss fight.
It's the most pared-down, purified form
of single combat
with another swordsman in the Souls games,
and that's really, to me,
the best thing.
Dark Souls 2 has a lot more of this kind of fight
than the previous two games
and more than Bloodborne also,
and this, I must stress for me,
this is my opinion,
is a gift.
The pursuer, the lost sinner,
the looking-glass knight,
Velstadt,
and in the DLCs, the Fume Knight
and Sir Valon and the Burnt Ivory King.
In my opinion,
these fights are what the Souls games' mechanics
are vessels for.
This is what the game should be built around.
There's even the old Dragon Slayer,
a version of the Ornstein and Smurfs fight
that indulges in this aspect
more than fighting two people at once could do.
I remember telling my friends
that I'd wished there'd been a one-on-one fight
with a character like Ornstein,
perhaps as a mini-boss later on,
and those friends played the PS3 version of 2
while I waited for it to come out on PC.
The first thing they did when it came out
was tell me where to go for a cool surprise over Skype,
and I got the fight I'd wanted from the previous game.
I'm sure people complained
that this was a needless rehash or fan pandering,
but it was literally a fight
I specifically thought would have been fun
and missed not having,
and I'm glad someone working on Dark Souls 2
agreed with me.
Honestly, when I saw early critics saying,
Dark Souls 2 is pretty great,
but you fight a lot of dudes in armor,
I remember immediately thinking,
hell, yes.
There are other kinds of fight,
and it's good to have them,
but they are the best.
Perhaps one of the worst things
about Demon's Souls and Dark Souls 1
is they didn't properly master this idea yet.
Demon's Souls had the penetrator, don't laugh,
and some decent NPC fights like Garl Vinland,
the actual final boss of the Valley of Defilement.
I mentioned the ones Dark Souls had,
but 2 elevated these fights to their proper place
as the core kind of fight you did the most,
and I love it for that.
The Heide Knights are criminally underrated.
They deliberately look and fight very differently
from the Black Knights of Dark Souls 1,
and if you let them get up,
which you should do,
because why else are you attacking them?
They sit down and do nothing on purpose
until you want to fight them.
The fight is usually pretty cool.
They kill me a lot,
so I can't show me beating them here really easily,
which would have been nice footage to have,
but, um...
The narrative critics create
when they talk about dudes in armor
is that the developers ran out of ideas,
but with just a slight change in perspective,
it becomes clear that the developers
had a really good new idea,
which was to use more of a kind of fight
that was vastly underutilized in previous games
and worked really well.
Does that really count as a new idea?
Yeah, sure.
Well, I'm gonna claim it is, at least,
and you can't stop me.
It's a fundamental change in the makeup of the game,
and in my opinion, it's for the better.
That's not to say that's the only kind of boss fight, though.
Like in Dark Souls,
there are plenty of different kinds of fight
breaking up the monotony
against bigger bosses like the Last Giant.
Uh, there's unique, one-of-a-kind fights
like the one with Scorpioness Nagica
who visually resembles Quelaag
but is a very different kind of fight,
but there's all kinds.
There's the Royal Rat Vanguard,
there's the Congregation,
there's the Covetous Demon,
there's, uh, Mr. Chariot,
and there's the Dark Lurker
if you couldn't be bothered to go do all the stuff
that you need to do to fight him,
which I couldn't,
so I didn't get any footage of it.
I've also heard the criticism
that there are too many bosses
that consist of fights with large groups,
and this is proof of the game's poor design.
Similar problems extend to other boss fights,
which seem to follow the mantra,
if you can't make it good,
make it difficult by adding more stuff.
This is Matthew Matosis.
His Dark Souls 2 critique video came out
just over a month after the release of the game
in April 2014.
It blew up somewhat on the internet,
to the point that a lot of the times
I see someone in person or online
talking about Dark Souls 2,
they're often using criticisms
that can be heard in this video,
and many who don't like the game
will cite it as a source for their explanation of why.
In fact, when asking viewers for criticisms
that they would want to see me respond to,
the bulk of them linked this video,
and most of the people that didn't
did so because they knew for certain
I would have already seen this one by now.
We're dealing with a piece of criticism
that had, in its own way,
quite a fundamental impact
on discourse surrounding the game.
The arguments got copied, repeated, referenced,
and in many ways, I think,
the prevailing dismissive attitudes
towards the game's quality
started to crystallize as a result of this video.
That's not to say the video is literally to blame
for negativity towards Dark Souls 2,
but regardless, it is necessary
that this critique be defeated and destroyed at all costs.
The mechanics of the Souls games
are built for one-on-one engagements
thanks to its slow attack animations
which are uninterruptible once they start,
and a lock-on camera
which focuses heavily on a single foe.
This early criticism is an interesting one.
The claim is that adding more enemies into the game
and also into some boss fights
is a lazy attempt to increase difficulty,
and that this is bad
because Souls games are specifically designed
to work best against single-enemy encounters.
Matthew Matosis is entitled to his opinion,
and I respect that,
but here's why this is a lie.
There are absolutely ways of dealing
with larger numbers of crowds.
It just requires different behavior
than how you normally deal with enemies
when there's just one or two.
Crowd control is a different skill
than the one that you're normally required to test,
but it's one that's worth testing
and really isn't in previous games.
I remember God Hand being criticized
for having too many enemies for an engine
that was claimed to only really work best
in one-on-one fights,
but you can look up people playing it
and see there's plenty of crowd control,
but not if you always play the way you do
against just one opponent at a time.
Take the prowling Magus fight, for example.
If you want to kill one of the crawling undead
littering this fight,
your eyes need to be taken off the casters
at the back in order to lock on.
Ah, you see, here's your problem.
Matthew makes the supposedly obvious criticism
that locking on makes it hard to see your enemy
so the fight isn't well-designed,
or fights against groups are inherently bad
in this type of game or something,
but why would you lock on?
You see, the Dark Souls series has this amazing feature
where, using the right stick,
you can rotate the camera
to show anything you want on the screen.
You can manually control the camera yourself.
When you think about it,
his argument actually is that the lock-on system
works best against single enemies,
and he's right about that,
but that's why you don't lock on
in a fight against multiple enemies.
Arguably, the main lesson you're taught
as early on as the first real areas
is that enemies are attacking from all over the place
and you ought to keep your wits about you
more than just pressing the button
that focuses on one person and hoping for the best.
This is a game that prides itself
on expecting you to look where you're going,
even as far back as the first game
with the guy hiding behind the doorway
and people hiding in corners
even all the way over in Bloodborne.
The lock-on system is a tool to be utilized carefully,
just like every other ability and mechanic.
Matt found the lock-on function was bad in this scenario
and concluded that it was a flaw with the game.
The challenge in this boss fight, like with the rats,
is to avoid getting swarmed and put into a bad situation
to keep track of yourself and navigate carefully.
If you locked directly onto one of the enemies,
you would have a problem,
and that means you don't do that.
Dark Souls II uses fights like this
and a generally different sort of level design
to teach you that in this world,
sometimes focusing down on a specific individual is a mistake.
Matthew didn't like Dark Souls II as much
because he didn't learn this lesson
and kept trying to play it the exact way
he played the previous two.
He also invokes the time you fight against the two Dragon Riders,
and there's a cute little clip I want to show
where he locks onto one
and then has to angle himself precisely
so he can see the two of them.
The twin Dragon Riders are another example of this.
You want to avoid attacks from both of them
while periodically damaging one of them,
but in order to do so, you need to lock onto one
and position yourself in such a way
so you can see the other.
This clip is meant to show how bad the lock-on system is
in two-person fights
and therefore how poorly designed this fight is
for putting this guy all the way over there,
but the thing is,
you could just not hit the lock-on button.
You could just not do that.
You can aim the camera wherever you want.
You can still dodge and attack.
You know...
["clicking"]
I looked back over the footage of me doing this fight
and I didn't lock on at all
until one of them was dead
and it became a good idea to completely focus on one enemy.
This naturally occurred to me
because this is how Dark Souls 2 teaches you to play.
I honestly think the mechanics
and the way they're utilized in the first two games
has gotten so ingrained in people who liked those two
that it makes them play weirdly
in games that work slightly differently
or have different kinds of challenge
and this strikes them as a flaw.
I got some criticism on my last video
that it's wrong to say it's possible to play a game wrong
and there's a lot of ways of playing Dark Souls
and they're all equally valid
if that's how the player wants to do it
and, yeah, kinda,
but all I can say is I can definitely see
why Matthew Matosis and other critics
had a less good time with Dark Souls 2
if this is how they approached it.
This looks a whole lot like playing the game wrong
and blaming the game for it.
I still do really bad in this fight, though.
Notice yourself.
Just cut away from this quicker in the final edit.
Also, we need to edit out the part where I say this, please.
Matthew is still trying to use the lock-on mechanic in fights
even as late as the Watcher and Defender bosses
and he's still using a shield.
Aw, bless.
Someone really liked the previous games
and tried real hard not to unlearn what they learned there.
This kind of criticism sheds light on the critical perspective
that approached the game in the first place.
Players who went into the game expecting it to be exactly like the previous ones
inevitably did badly in these sections
and seemingly blamed the game for it.
Joseph Anderson, a critic who put out three videos
about Dark Souls in late 2015
and was much less negative about the game,
similarly doesn't use the lock-on feature
in many of the fights he shows in his video
and, like me, he fought most of them without using a shield either.
In the same manner that shields are fine,
but not if they engender passivity,
the lock-on system is a great mechanic
that can accidentally engender a reliance upon it.
Also, Monster Hunter, a series many regard as very similar in a lot of ways,
has basically no lock-on functionality whatsoever
and the subhuman criminals who love Monster Hunter
seem to do just fine using it to see the enemies however they want.
That's not to say Monster Hunter wouldn't benefit from having one,
but if it did have one,
it would probably be something to use sparingly,
much like in Dark Souls 2.
Also, it's worth remembering that this type of boss
has been present in Souls games for a long time.
You might remember, I don't know, the Phalanx,
uh, the first real boss in Demon's Souls.
It's a fight about balancing the interplay between the actual opponent
and the numerous creatures that break off from it and act independently,
threatening to surround and overwhelm you.
Then, right after, there's the Tower Knight boss fight.
Jeez, the first two bosses in the first game in the series
and both of the muse mechanics Matthew Matosis concluded
are inherently antithetical to the core of the Souls games.
What, did the developers not realize how their game worked?
If I look onto the Archer, I can't see the Tower Knight unless I stand here.
I can't use the function designed for focusing on one person
and see everyone else.
What, did the B-team design this game?
Ahahahahahahaha
[(static)]
Attacks also lock on to an unnecessary degree.
When a boss goes to do an overhead attack,
it will usually track the player up until the very last moment before impact.
When Matthew Matosis makes this comment,
in order to make an example of a superior fight,
he cuts to footage of the Adjudicator,
the...least memorable fight in the entire Souls series?
I forget the Adjudicator exists every time I play Demon's Souls without fail,
and then I go,
oh yeah, this guy,
and I kill him on the first try and forget about him again.
His attacks go for where you used to be 10 minutes ago.
No aspect of this boss should be the model for how fights should work in Souls games.
The simple fact is that in previous entries in the series,
circle strafing enemies has been an easy way to cheese a lot of the game.
Because the enemies focus in on you more,
guess what?
You actually have to dodge some of their attacks now,
using timing and knowledge of the right direction to move
based on judging how the enemy's moving.
A lot of the fights Mr. Matosis, if that is his real name,
uses to make examples of this apparent horrific problem
actually show him mistiming a dodge,
or dodging in the direction of the swing.
I don't think this demonstrates what he thinks it's demonstrating.
Bosses all over the series lock right onto you as their attack goes off.
This happens because on some level,
the game is about learning how and when to dodge
instead of just spinning a circle around someone so they can never hit you.
The amount of lock-on enemies have in this game
is only a problem if you don't know how to dodge attacks.
I honestly think this footage speaks for itself.
Here we're getting into the bedrock of some fundamental differences
in the way Dark Souls 2 is made,
and what it achieves versus the previous game's decisions,
both in terms of gameplay and in terms of storytelling.
Dark Souls is commonly lauded for being one large interconnected world.
I criticized this perception a little in the Bloodborne video,
and because I'm a hack, I'm gonna rehash that here.
Dark Souls' interconnectedness is fun
and creates an interesting sense of being in a real place,
and it's cool you can find yourself in a real world
and creates an interesting sense of being in a real place,
and it's cool you can find ways of getting from one place to another
and nice little shortcuts,
but it also weakens the game in a lot of ways.
Okay, I know that's contentious.
I'm not stupid. Hear me out here.
It's technically a good thing
that the areas lead across and into each other so much.
Blighttown, for example, is made more interesting
by the fact it connects both the Depths
and the Valley of Drakes and the Great Hollow,
and it leads to Quelaag's domain
and later is used to access the Demon Ruins.
However, let's think for a moment
about level design and encounter design.
When you're designing a world that can be traversed across
to all these different places or even simply back and forth,
in this case, climbing out of Blighttown
once you first kill Quelaag,
you're designing a level that makes compromises
to be usable in all these ways at once.
No enemy encounter can be designed
to play really well in one direction
because you aren't,
and encounters all have to compensate
for the fact you're gonna be coming back through it the other way.
In fact, at a certain point,
it becomes clear the developers realized
they'd forgotten to fully compensate for this.
The blow dart guys who inflict Toxic on you
are basically unavoidable if you're trying to get out
because of the inevitable ladder climbing you have to do.
So they made them not respawn,
so you only ever have to kill them once,
and therefore, on your way back out,
you probably don't have to deal with them at all
because you killed them all.
But this also severely compromises
the challenge of going down
because it means each blow dart guy
only ever has to be dealt with once.
You can basically just run to them,
die killing them,
and then carry on in a now much easier area.
By having to account for the fact
you're gonna have to come back the other way,
the fun and challenge of going through it
either way is hamstrung.
This is not great design.
You can even see a more ideal version of Blighttown
in Anor Londo.
You can only ever fight these enemies this one way,
and that means this one way's really interesting.
You know?
This section's great.
There's no way to come back the way you came,
but there's also no reason to
because once Anor Londo is beaten,
you unlock the ability to warp between bonfires,
seemingly an acknowledgment that this area
makes no sense going through it backwards to get out.
Plus, at this point in the game,
the developers had definitely realized
that running back and forth between areas
is actually really tedious.
But because warping wasn't really fully fleshed out
in Dark Souls 1,
there's an awful lot of needless walking.
Walking back to bonfires you already lit
but can't warp to,
walking through long paths,
or walking through still long
but slightly shorter paths
because this one's technically a shortcut,
and then you die and you have to do it again.
It's not good.
It's not the best it could be.
I just want to fight Artorias again.
It's a cool fight,
but there's, like, five minutes of walking
every single time,
even with this shortcut.
And guess what?
If you didn't find the bonfire at the Daughter of Chaos,
which, by the way, why would you?
Because it's a secret hidden behind an illusionary wall.
There's no nearby warpable bonfire
for beating the Demon Ruins.
So, when it's time to go do that bit,
guess what?
It's time to go all the way back
through Blighttown again.
Yaaaaaay!
Blighttown was so busy leading down
into Quelaag's Domain and the Demon Ruins
and the Great Hollow,
leading across into the Valley of Drakes,
and leading up into the depths
and its own arse
that it forgot to have particularly good gameplay
or to have any frames.
Hey, check it out.
I didn't even need to invoke Dark Souls 2
to explain why Dark Souls 1's interconnectedness
is bad in a lot of cases,
but I guess I should
since I'm talking about Dark Souls 2.
Dark Souls 2's version of Blighttown,
the Gutter,
is way better designed
because it's built to be journeyed through once
in one direction.
Once you're in the Gutter,
it's literally impossible to climb out, actually.
You would have to warp,
which you can now mercifully do
at the beginning of the game
and between any bonfire.
It's almost like this game
was designed to be played by people
who don't want to fucking
run around in circles for hours,
which is an improvement,
I would say, personally.
There's a lot of sheer drops
and daring leaps.
The enemies can be designed purely
for this one direction
and no other bullshit,
like the beetles,
which one direction are better than.
Enemies only stop respawning
if you've killed them so many times,
it's clear they're not really a problem for you
and you just need to get back to later bits
instead of immediately
never respawning ever again
because the developers knew
they were a bit rubbish.
The treatment of these areas in particular
is emblematic—
I love that word—
of the game's overall approaches to design
and I'm not gonna tell you which one is better,
but it's obvious.
So far, I've only talked about world design
in terms of the ensuing level design,
but that's not the only thing impacted by that.
There's also an aesthetic component
and this, I think, is an aspect
that most exemplifies the difference
in concerns and goals
between the first two Dark Souls games in particular.
Dark Souls 1's world has, let's call it,
a physical coherency to it.
If you're standing in a high place
and look in a direction,
you will see a place you end up going
later in the game.
The world of Lordran feels like
a physically consistent, objective world.
Here's a 3D model of the Dark Souls 1 world.
Apart from a few very clearly separated sections,
it all physically ties together,
which is pretty cool.
Meanwhile, in Dark Souls 2,
this is far from the case.
Plenty of places don't make visual sense.
You can get to the top of a tower
you physically see in the distance
and you can see how tall it is,
but then at the tippy top,
you find an elevator
and it takes you further up
into nowhere
and you emerge in a lava land
that couldn't possibly exist.
Theoretically, you could dig
a deep enough hole in the ground
and all the lava would just flow out
into the world below and kill everyone.
Remember the compiled 3D model
of Dark Souls 1?
Here's the model for Dark Souls 2.
["Dark Souls II"-style music playing in the background,
with a fast-paced drum beat,
and a fast-paced drum beat with a fast-paced drum beat
and a fast-paced drum beat with a fast-paced drum beat
and a fast-paced drum beat with a fast-paced drum beat
and a fast-paced drum beat with a fast-paced drum beat
It's just they're in the same place.
The universe of Dark Souls 2
is a nonsensical, free-associative nightmare
in which you find yourself in impossible places,
architecture giving way to other worlds
without warning,
the world itself falling apart,
becoming physically untrustworthy.
It's an Overlook Hotel-style monster.
People have criticized the game for being like this,
but I have a question.
How is this a bad thing?
The sense of mystery this creates was really compelling to me
as I worked my way through the world.
I never knew what I was going to see next
because I literally couldn't see it coming.
Something I enjoyed about Dark Souls 1
was this idea that time itself was beginning to fall apart.
You encountered the spirits of those who came before you and died,
like you could find their armor on presumably their corpses,
and in the DLC, you literally go back in time.
The Age of Fire was ending,
and reality, on some level, was ending with it.
Dark Souls 2 gets to constantly benefit
not only from linearity leading to specific visuals
along with better-planned encounters,
but it's pushed up even further by embracing inconsistency.
The result is that you're constantly parading through places
that feel like they're out of a fantasy film
or an 80s album cover.
Take, for example, the Dragon Shrine right here.
You get this majestic moment of a secret sky castle.
I say that again.
Secret sky castle being revealed to you for the first time,
completely hidden from visibility
until you go up this one elevator.
You get this ridiculously epic, in the traditional sense,
grandiose shot of a majestic, ornate shrine
circled by a dozen dragons
revealing itself to you as you go through a passage.
You can't see the shrine from the ground,
and you can't see any landmarks on the ground below from here.
Concrete cohesiveness is thrown out in favor of a puzzling,
surprising, and beautiful incohesiveness.
We're dealing with two contrasting methods of showing a fantasy world.
I say contrasting because, in my opinion,
neither is inherently superior.
The trouble, I think, is that some either assume this
because the first did,
or simply wanted what the first had.
And that's not quite the same as judging something on its own merits,
but I can still see the point there.
["Dark Souls II"]
I've heard the complaint that Dark Souls II is linear.
This is true.
Many critics then go on to say that this makes it worse than Dark Souls,
which was non-linear.
This is treason, and I'll see you in hell.
As we just established, Dark Souls is interconnected.
It is not non-linear.
This is not semantics. This is a big deal.
I swear to God.
You have clear-cut objectives that you have to complete in a set order.
You can technically kill Quelaag first before the bell gargoyles.
You can also ignore the depths if you want to.
But you have to kill these two bosses,
you have to ring two bells,
you have to do Sen's Fortress,
and then you do Anor Londo,
and then you have to collect four Lord Souls to progress,
which you can do in any order if you want,
but you have to do all of them.
This isn't non-linear.
This is a choice of which linear path you take first.
This sense of linearity is disguised by the interconnectedness
and the sense of having to run back and forth through a world
because the warps weren't fully fleshed out,
but that's not non-linearity.
That's actually kind of bad design, uh, masking linearity.
At least in Dark Souls II,
you don't technically need to beat all four main bosses
to unlock the entrance to Drangleic.
You can just get a lot of souls.
That's actually way more of an alternative
than any part of Dark Souls I.
For a hugely entertaining comparison,
check out the two AGDQ speedruns of the two games.
Oh, I started with a Master Key so I can kill the two bosses
I have no choice but to kill in a slightly different order
if I want to,
but I'm, uh, I'm not going to
because it turns out the intended way was faster anyway.
Fuck you! I used Bonfire Aesthetics
to kill the Rotten four times
and skip three quarters of the main fucking game.
See you in shit, Dark Souls!
Also, not only could Dark Souls have easily been less linear
if it wanted to,
the game fucking contrives itself
to ensure that it isn't with needless bullshit.
Do you want to beat Seath the Skeletalist
before putting the Lordvessel on the thing?
Nice try, idiot.
Impassable magic fog.
Oh, you just beat Quelaag?
I want to see what's going on in the obvious path past her
that it makes sense to go down
instead of climbing all the way back out immediately.
Well, fuck you!
We put some fucking mist here
because we arbitrarily decided
you don't get to do this stuff.
You got to do the other things first.
See you in 10 to 15 hours, you worthless piss hound.
Do you want to see what Neato's up to?
Tune in next time when—
Go fuck yourself, idiot!
Do you want to kill the four kings before doing anything else?
Well, guess what?
You can.
You can get their Lord Soul first thing if you want to.
You just need Artorias' ring from Sif.
Oh, my goodness.
There's so much freedom in these games.
A similar mechanic is used in Dark Souls II,
but it's with doors that are off the beaten path,
do not block the most obvious form of progress,
and you might even forget about them
until you get the king's ring
and realize that's the symbol of the king
they were talking about,
and it's like you figured out a mystery
and you get to watch an ancient fantasy door
slowly unlock when you put it on.
I like ancient fantasy doors.
They're—they're a thing that I'm into.
That sounds really weird, but I mean that.
I like cool doors.
Shut up.
They're nice.
It's a nice door!
On top of all of that,
Dark Souls II has a very different kind of design overall
with an enhanced focus on player freedom
in the actual fights,
which are the things that you spend
most of the time doing in these games.
Demon's Souls and Dark Souls 1's encounters
are, in a sense, kind of restrictive.
Each area and encounter,
by which I mean distinguishable fight
between a group in the game,
exists to test the player in some specific way.
The Tower Knight exists to test
how you deal with an encounter
with one big slow enemy
supplemented by a multitude of ranged attackers.
The player can use any items
they have at their disposal to deal with this—
magic, swords, shields, items, or what have you—
but crucially, the same skill is being tested
no matter what,
namely, how you deal with this one situation.
So no matter what your loadout was—
you know, axe, big sword, daggers, magic, arrows—
you're either dodging a ridiculous amount of arrows
to fight this guy,
or more likely taking out all the archers one by one
with whatever you happen to have on you
and then engaging the knight on his own.
The archers on the walls of Anor Londo
exist to test how you deal with
walking down a straight path
with attacks that can easily knock you off.
No matter what sort of character you are,
the same thing is being tested no matter what,
and you have to employ the same skills
to get past it no matter what.
You're literally walking a straight, linear path.
A lot of the first two Souls games
are based on putting you in a specific place,
then throwing a specific thing at you
and making you deal with it the way they want you to do.
In Sen's Fortress,
you're walking between the same sets of traps
and negotiating the same fortress in the same way
no matter what character you built.
In all of these examples,
the focus is on an enclosed space
so you can be forced into dealing with the scenario
the developers want you to engage with.
Ironically, despite being supposedly way more linear,
Dark Souls 2 is generally designed
in a much more free, open way
in regards to its encounters.
Encounters take place in a much wider open area
with a focus on having more space
to navigate as you see fit.
Pair ogs on play.
In this room, there are several knights.
The knights are very difficult to face as a bunched-up group,
but if you want, you can lead them out onto the battlements
where they're unable to attack all at once.
However, there's a risk of falling off
and there's a guy in the distance shooting arrows at you.
The player is encouraged to know where they want to fight
and make decisions about how to engage in the combat
beyond knowing when to dodge
in fights against more manageable amounts of enemies.
This approach generally extends
throughout the rest of the game.
This increases player freedom
by letting them decide precisely how and where
to pitch their battles,
and mobility and positioning
become much more important aspects of the game.
Combat is much more free form as a result.
Archers in the previous games are, let's call it, forceful.
They're put there, and you have no choice
but to deal with them.
They're usually supplementing a different enemy,
so you either have to deal with them
while the archers are shooting at you,
or you have to take time out before that fight
just to deal with the archers
before resuming it unhindered.
And if you die, you have to take the time out
to deal with the archers yet again,
along with walking all the way back
through a gauntlet of enemies,
which, in these games, always respawn.
God, that sounds like fun, doesn't it?
I wonder why, statistically,
so many people stop playing here.
I wonder.
I-I...
Maybe it's the player's fault.
Ranged attackers in Dark Souls II
are tremendously less annoying.
Take, for example, the ones in the encounter
I already described.
The player has the option of engaging the enemy
in places the archer can't attack you at all,
but fighting in that area
has its own particular trade-offs.
The player gets to decide
how to deal with the archers
instead of basically having no choice
but to continuously dodge them
because this is THE place
this fight is supposed to happen,
or painstakingly take them out
every time you want to do the fight.
There's archers and other kinds of ranged attackers
in the Forest of Fallen Giants,
but there's now room to maneuver
and move your enemies away from their range
into different areas with different characteristics.
Like I said, you get to choose
how and where to have these fights.
The open space is better for the clump of enemies,
but you have to worry about the archer,
or you can go for the ranged attackers first
and take the risk of being overwhelmed or caught out,
but then fight them free from that problem.
You can chase after the archers here,
but they'll follow you up the ladder,
and that'll create a gauntlet,
which you then have to avoid by jumping down
or cutting through them.
This fight can play out a lot of different ways
based on how you choose to move within it,
whereas in the previous games,
it's mostly just you have to do this thing
first till you'll die,
and then you dodge the attacks
and attack them to win,
and honestly, Dark Souls 2's better.
Often people have criticized this game
for having multitudes more enemies to fight at once,
and this is an artificial inflation of difficulty,
but the thing is, because of Dark Souls 2's
vastly different kind of level design,
this is simply a different kind of challenge
provided to the player than the previous ones,
and it's not an insurmountable one.
The challenge in areas with tons of dudes
is in how you deal with tons of dudes at once.
If you're out of position,
you'll get displaced and destroyed by the swarm.
Videos critical of the amount of enemies in Dark Souls 2
will often show you contextless footage
of their character surrounded and being ganked to death,
and look how unfair this is,
but what they're showing takes place
after the point where they already messed up
by letting themselves get utterly surrounded
like this in the first place.
The previous games rarely make your strategy
when it comes to relative positioning
as crucial as Dark Souls 2,
but there are a couple.
My fave is this bridge in Demon's Souls.
Once you stand here,
see the guys blocking the end,
and turn around and realize
every enemy you failed to kill on the way here
is now funneling down the other end,
you're struck with the beautifully tense realization
that if you don't do something now,
you're already dead.
But many of the main areas and boss fights in Dark Souls 2
draw this aspect into critical focus
and in a much more freeform way,
where instead of simply being trapped in a small area,
you're in a large area
and have to deal with a group
that's actively threatening to surround you.
Instead of the passive challenge of a physical choke point,
the fight is a reactive challenge
in the form of a moving set of enemies
that can easily form a choke point
with their own movements,
which you can then deal with however you like.
Fights against groups can play out totally differently
based on how you fight in them,
and that's just really cool.
When a friend was playing through Dark Souls 1
and asking for help,
I would just tell them literally the thing
they were meant to do to get past that area,
because usually there was one main way,
and if you didn't know what it was,
it would kill you.
In Dark Souls 2,
the same friend never had to ask for advice
because they were free to figure it out.
There were other ways through
based on what things they had with them
and how they wanted to do that fight.
It was a lot more interesting
for players who aren't already mega fans
of the first Dark Souls game
and what it specifically did with fights.
I think people who want to be critical of Dark Souls 2
can look at the amount of enemies and go,
ah, they just threw more in,
but the entire design of the game
is almost fundamentally different in so many ways
that I really don't feel like that's an accurate comparison.
The Shrine of Amarna has a ton of magic users,
but they're in an area where firing back at them
is finally doable,
unlike the archers in the Tower Knight fight
or the Demon fight,
and you can use magic or arrows
based on what you have with you.
Dodging them is trivial
because you can see the attacks coming
far more than a bunch of tiny arrows,
and there's plenty of cover you can utilize
in various different ways
so you can fight enemies
while not in the way of magic if you want to.
The final run to the boss is famously very tough,
but this is a fairly late game area
in a Dark Souls game.
It being hard is kind of the thing
that you paid to do.
Also, I just summoned for it.
It's okay. I don't have a problem with it.
They usually die during the fight,
and that makes it interesting
because it's like you take casualties
and then you carry on.
I like it.
I like summoning in these games.
There's a bunch of purists out there
who are like,
I never summon for any fights
because I want to be the best.
I want to handle them all.
I mean, sure.
Yeah, good for you.
I'm sure it feels tremendously good,
and it must be really annoying
that there are fights
that you really, really should summon for,
but I like having friends
who join me and do stuff.
I like that.
Speaking of having friends,
Dark Souls 2 lets you have friends.
There are even rings your character can wear
that mean it's really easy to single out
exactly who you want to summon.
You can have friends in Dark Souls now.
The network isn't going to melt down.
You're not going to have to install
a bunch of third-party mods
and hope that makes it work.
The game works now, guys.
I don't want to be seen to be dismissive
and just say people who die a lot
in group encounters are just bad at it
and their criticism is false.
That would be really stupid
to just say out loud like that.
So instead, I said it over...
10 minutes.
♪♪
Some of you might be familiar
with my video about Bloodborne.
It kinda revolutionized
the face of game design for all time.
Just kidding.
But it did kind of invent a newish concept,
at least I think it does.
I haven't heard anyone else using it before,
called play conditioning,
which refers to the way a game
leads you to play it
with the execution of its mechanics.
When a game kills you very easily,
tells you to prepare to die,
and hands you a shield,
and teaches you how to use it,
you're taught specific rules
about that game's world
and it sticks with you.
The rest of the game experience
could have been better served
by a different early approach,
but you've been quite definitively taught
a specific one
and it'll probably be a struggle
to unlearn it.
I brought this up in the video
to make the point that Bloodborne
quite deftly pushes the player
into a more frenetic direction
with a few subtle changes
to its base mechanics
and much wider reaching executions
of those mechanics.
There is still one or maybe two
shields in the game,
but you don't find them for so long
that you learned not to use them.
They exist almost to show you
that you never really needed them.
The shield engendered passivity.
That wording's actually kind of genius.
The game's own item description
directly blames shields themselves,
not players for not realizing
how they're supposed to use them.
I think that's really clever
and also an honest admission
that they kind of messed up
in Dark Souls 1.
Some folks disagreed with my comments
that playing with a shield
was an inherently wrong,
slow, overly defensive,
or boring way to play,
and I do have to stress
that's just my opinion.
You can play the games however you want.
I'm just describing how the game
is most fun in my opinion
and the ways I think the game
leads people to play it
in those more fun ways
than the previous ones.
While Bloodborne is undisputedly
the master of this,
Dark Souls 2 does a lot
of really great things
with play conditioning also,
things that other critics dismiss
as minor tweaks
or just don't talk about at all.
In the Bloodborne video,
my central example was the shield,
and we might as well start there too
because people don't
fucking mention this.
Dark Souls 2 has shields.
It has plenty of them,
and they're fine.
They work well,
and you can get some very defend-y ones
that do all the stuff you need,
and you can buff them
lots of different ways too,
but here's the thing.
Only one class
starts with a shield at all
in Dark Souls 2.
In fact, that class, the warrior,
begins life with a broken sword.
Every other character
starts with some semblance
of a fighting setup.
The knight has a broadsword,
the swordsman has two plus one swords,
the bandit has an axe and a bow,
and so on.
Starting with a shield
handicaps you in many ways
at the start of this game.
It forces you to use ingenuity
to get access to a weapon
that's more viable.
It's not even that great a shield.
Other classes having no shield
are forced to use dodging or parrying
or make good use of what they're given.
This is a tiny, tiny, simple change
to just starting loadouts,
but it's fantastic design.
It alters the shape
of the entire game experience.
You're expected, told even,
to make use of the engine
in a vastly different way
from how you're led to think
you're supposed to play the first game.
Shields you acquire early on
don't even block 100% of damage,
and you don't have much life,
so blocking is treated as a last resort
for if you really don't know
what else to do about an attack
or haven't learned its timing yet.
Dark Souls 2 is the first game in the series
where you started getting players
who were more casually walking around
without a shield at all,
preferring two-handing
or the new power stance
added for dual-wielding characters.
By the time you reach shields
that actually block lots of damage
the way early shields did in the first game,
you've employed a level of skill
getting to them that means using them
would be a waste of a good hand
you could be keeping another weapon in
or some magic.
Dodging like this would have seemed
like a needless, risky waste of time
to the old me if I had a shield
and could block the damage perfectly well,
but it would have been so slow.
You don't need Dark Souls 2
to teach you to play this way, obviously.
You can figure it out
if you do a lot of practicing
or look up a lot of YouTube videos
or do PvP or whatever,
but being forced to play that way
by the game
makes you learn it so much faster.
Other touches can be seen here, too,
like parrying.
In Dark Souls 1, parrying offered
a brief, clumsy moment
to get in a riposte.
Oh, and you can't even do a riposte
if you're two-handing in Dark Souls 1.
Thanks, fuckers.
The sound effect was satisfying
but hard to make out
if anything else was happening.
The window to respond was short
and the animations that played
where enemies were parried
were often really short and vague.
I didn't parry a lot in Dark Souls 1
because, frankly, I didn't trust the game
enough to let me capitalize on it.
In Dark Souls 2, parrying triggers
a loud, ultra-cool sound.
The enemies fall down in a protracted
dear-god-my-entire-world-is-ending
animation and stay there for ages
while they wait for you to capitalize.
This is, in a word, encouraging.
You feel like you've made a decisive move
and might even have already won.
You feel rewarded for learning
how an enemy attacks.
It's obvious you've pulled it off
and you have plenty of time to react
to knowing you've done it.
I felt, like I said,
encouraged to keep parrying.
Instead of abandoning it
after the early levels,
I only really using it
on heavily choreographed enemies
like I did in 1.
Parrying really only came into its own
in Bloodborne which handed you a weapon
specifically for doing it
and made even monstrous enemies parryable
but this represents a step
in the right direction.
I realized, playing Dark Souls 2,
that the reason it seemed too hard
to get to the level of skill
other people were displaying
was because getting there required
lots of time investment and practice
to get around the fact
the game itself did a pretty bad job
of getting you there by itself.
The phrase,
"'Get good' has been around for ages
but was massively popularized
in the Souls community
and this is because the gulf of skill
is so wide between new
and experienced players
that it's almost impossible
to help someone get on their level,
the only advice being, basically,
to keep playing until they become good
at the game.
No matter how you look at it,
the fact the community has trouble
introducing the game it's built around
to new players
constitutes something of a problem
and this is a problem I feel Dark Souls 2
solves with some very careful changes
in its design.
I said before that I thought
Dark Souls was incredible
but I owe that to DS2
showing me the way to appreciate it properly
and the way to approach it
in a way that was actually really fun.
The blueprint for Bloodborne,
the blood print, if you will,
of a lot of creative decisions,
lies in Dark Souls 2.
I'm unsure if it directly inspired
the attitudes to shields and healing
and level design and so on in Bloodborne
but even if it didn't,
the way Bloodborne seemingly builds
on these ideas for me
shows that 2 was a step in the right direction
even if it didn't get everything right.
Dark Souls 1 is, on a technical level,
interesting and complex.
The opening cinematic explains
the setup of the world of the story.
Gwyn and Co. mess up the ancient dragons,
build a society using the power of the soul,
and people start becoming undead and going mad
and the empire eventually collapses
when the flames start to go out
and Gwyn fucks up trying to fix it.
But what the player actually does
is run around a mostly empty world
killing the people who remain
so they can open a big door.
There isn't much actual interaction
with this story.
The stuff about everlasting dragons
and a war to kill them all
doesn't really have much of an impact
on the story of the player
killing the people who killed them
and nicking their souls.
What the first game excels at is lore.
In the sense that through item descriptions
and chance encounters
with the people who remain in the world
and are safe to talk to,
you can learn little tidbits about them as people.
You can run into a character,
have a brief conversation,
and be sure that if you pay attention to the world
and objects related to them or their people,
you'll learn something about them and their culture.
The closest you get to a story
is a guy saying ring some bells.
There's an old saying in my family.
Fuck your family.
This is the reason for the whole mission.
Like, you meet this guy who's like,
you know, my family have this fucked up stupid belief.
Or another guy saying ring some bells.
Or a serpent saying, hey, Gwyn was cool.
Kill his friends.
Or a different serpent saying,
Gwyn wasn't cool at all.
He was really rude.
Kill his friends.
The fun of the game comes from figuring out
a complete picture of what you can find,
but there isn't really a narrative
happening for most of it.
The player isn't really given a chance
to interact with the important events in this world.
They're just picking up the pieces
of stuff that already happened.
In comparison, to me,
Dark Souls 2 does something really interesting.
You get a cool metaphorical sequence in the opening
where a Darkseid-branded character's family
melts away under the weight of the curse
making you live so long you forget everything.
Already we're given our first proper theme,
and it works on both the personal and world level
in that the world is making less and less sense
because things are falling away,
which, by the way, coincides really well
with the fact the world design is like that.
The story itself, to start with,
is self-consciously a rehash of the previous game.
The Emerald Herald tells you you need to face the king,
and to do that, you need some big souls.
Oh, cool. Thanks. Nice one.
So you do that.
Along the way, you find areas
and bosses strangely evocative of the previous ones.
Nadjka is, shall we say, Quelaag-adjacent.
The gutter is very Blighttown-y, and so on.
There's a lot of parallels,
but it's never quite made clear
that you're explicitly in the same world as Lordran
or at least not the same places.
There's just a subtle thing in the back of your head
about how this all seems oddly familiar.
So you kill all the enemies,
and on the way, there are these occasional locked doors.
There's no explicit sense that you're missing any large areas.
All the paths terminate in dead ends
or weird shrines with the primal bonfires in them.
The game is pretty long just accounting for these four paths.
So when you go to Castle Drangleic,
you get the sense this really is the end game.
You progress all the way through the castle
to the shrine beneath,
and then through the Grave of Saints.
There's a real sense of build-up.
Then you fight Velstadt,
who's guarding the door to Vendrick.
After beating him,
you finally go to meet your presumably final opponent,
the same final opponents you fought in Demon's Souls and Dark Souls 1,
the corrupted king of the world you've been walking through.
But instead, this happens.
Vendrick is a shadow of the man talked about in the lore
and by the characters that remember him.
He, like the fate of the rest of the undead,
like the player's character will eventually become,
has lost his mind.
You don't have to fight Vendrick at all.
He's not your enemy.
He's just a man who lost his way and everything else with it.
It's hard to relate how touching this is.
The game genuinely feels like it was building
to the very final confrontation.
It's a game about a man who's lost his way,
and he's trying to find his way back.
It was building to the very final confrontation.
The room is built to have a dramatic passage down steps
similar to the lead-up to Gwyn,
and it's built so that the camera naturally passes through it
to reveal what Vendrick has become.
I feel bad for spoiling it
for people who haven't experienced the game yet,
but this moment is pivotal to what makes the story interesting.
You're built up for the traditional Souls game encounter
with a fallen king,
and instead you're faced with a thing
to whom it doesn't even occur to fight you anymore,
shambling around almost naked.
You just have to pick up the king's ring,
which unlocks the final areas
and allows you to head to Aldia's keep
and eventually meet the ancient dragon
who's also not interested in fighting you.
He gives you the Ashen Mist Heart,
which lets you journey into the memories of giants
from the old war Vendrick fought.
You get to see a lot of the damage
that you encounter in the main path happening.
It's really neat.
Killing the giant lord lets you face Nashandra,
Vendrick's queen, at the Throne of Want.
Killing her nets you precisely one ending.
Your character sits on the throne,
presumably having become the new king,
and then the credits play.
But instead of resetting the game,
it just carries on.
You're put back in the world.
The game deliberately undercuts its story.
You win,
but what do you win?
Kingship over a dying world?
The chance to sit in a chair?
Only one character in the game
even recognizes you as the new king,
Shal'Kuar, the seemingly immortal cat
who also knows most of the rest of the lore
about the other bosses.
If you want to,
you can use bonfire ascetics to refight old bosses
or refresh enemies if you exhaust them,
or you can completely kill all the NPCs
even the Emerald Herald.
You can make the world of Dark Souls 2
completely empty of people and monsters.
The only way to access New Game Plus
is to sit at a bonfire
and deliberately choose to start it all over again.
I like these choices
because they hammer home the hopelessness
of the Dark Souls story that was there in one,
but undercut by the fact
no matter what ending you got,
you just started at the beginning again.
Dark Souls 2 forces you to contemplate
how little you've really achieved
with all these deaths,
and then forces you to decide
when it's time to do it all again.
Ultimately, Dark Souls 2 is about cycles.
The story is deliberately evocative
of the previous game,
exploring the empire of a king who fell,
but with an explicit focus
on how this has all happened before,
and not just coincidentally.
Perhaps it's something we're doomed to keep doing.
Humanity,
perhaps unable to ever fully escape its own nature,
is repeating its mistakes over and over.
For a game with so much architecture and character
in so many of its designs,
the best piece of imagery is the simplest one,
the symbol of the dark sign.
It's a loop, a circle,
reflecting the way the undead return to life
no matter what,
continuing even after they lose their minds.
Humanity itself is trapped in this loop.
The story is much more for the player
than in the previous game.
It's a story in which the player is expected
to contemplate their own actions
instead of those of others,
and recognize that the problem here
isn't the mistakes of the king or his people,
but that people as a whole were unable to escape
the mistakes that happened in Dark Souls 1.
But what's even better is how it makes sure to tell you
this isn't just one repeat.
No, the story of Dark Souls 1 has happened
maybe countless times,
so many you don't know and will never fully comprehend it.
In a prison cell in the Lost Bastille
is a man made of stone.
If you unfreeze him, he refers to himself
as Straid of Olaphis.
Olaphis was a kingdom where Drangleic now stands,
untold generations ago,
so long ago that no one but Straid
and the descriptions of spells and items
invented by him or belonging to him
even mention it.
In Dark Souls 1, all the various areas and people
and their stories and what happened
can be pieced together quite meticulously.
You can, with enough work,
put together a complete universe out of the facts.
In Dark Souls 2, an entire civilization
can be so utterly lost
that only one man even knows its name.
Who knows how many empires rose and fell
between Olaphis and Drangleic
or Lordran and Drangleic,
but pieces of them lie scattered everywhere,
decayed, colossal wrecks,
each with their own rise to power
and their own mad kings
and their own undead curse rending them apart.
The Forest of Fallen Giants is Vendrick's doing,
but Earthen Peak?
The Old Iron Keep?
These places rose and fell on their own terms.
The DLC, which we'll get to later,
each covers its own completely separate tale
of a kingdom that rose and fell
in roughly the same area.
What's compelling about this
is that it's more bizarre,
more unexplained,
and more human.
People in the Souls universe are victims
of a history they might never be able to learn.
The story is about being lost
in a confusing maze you can never fully understand,
a feeling strengthened by the nightmarish
of the actual physical world.
Quelaag alone was simply a sad story
about a woman transformed into a demon
by an attempt to create more life,
but now she's contextualized
as a victim of a far deeper problem
that mankind is having trouble escaping,
because no matter what,
it seems to keep happening over and over.
Something really cool and kind of subtle
is hidden in the basement of Majula.
Down, hidden in the dirt,
so small not many people notice,
is a small, fractured piece
of the Lordvessel from the first game.
This is the best expression
of what Dark Souls 2 is doing with its story.
It's interested in telling a story
about being unable to fully piece together
what's happening,
as the character loses their minds
in a doomed world of destroyed statues.
Your character doesn't even know
what a Lordvessel is.
To them, this is nothing,
just a thing lying in the dust.
It also represents the developers' attempts
to do their own thing and move on
by reducing an iconic part of the previous game
to a piece of rubble in a basement.
For me, the weakest parts of the previous games
is when I got handed a whole heap of names,
roles, and backstory.
Demon's Souls did this, too,
by just listing a bunch of people
who went into the fog.
I could just find those people
and learn about them manually,
but instead, the first games open
with a needless role call
and a story about a fight with dragons
that doesn't really tell me anything.
The guys I'm going to kill
killed a bunch of dragons a long time ago,
and that's important,
because...
Mmmmmmm.
One flaw in the themes of Dark Souls 1
was for all its criticisms of the world
Gwyn had built,
an awful lot of time was dedicated to his kingdom,
to exploring its majesty,
and even when you darken Anor Londo,
you still find yourself compelled
to look upon his works and despair.
Dark Souls 2 does the most compelling
and interesting thing it could possibly do
with the story of Gwyn,
Lord of Cinder,
Master of Anor Londo,
King of Lordran.
It asks,
who?
I don't even think he's mentioned by name at all.
Gwyn may well have been a good and mighty king,
but the lone and level sands stretch far away,
and he is gone.
The paranoid king who had Straid petrified is gone,
the king of Lordran is gone,
and the king of Drangleic is gone,
but his burnt-out husk still walks the earth yet,
and we remember him for now.
I think a lot of people wanted
a story with the exact type of intricacies
of the previous game.
I can see wanting that
and understand being disappointed,
but I prefer the lonesomeness
and the unsolvable puzzle you're given
of a world where the weight of time
has dissolved away most of history,
and even the physical world
twists into itself in impossible ways
and icy peaks can give way to the flames of chaos.
It's maddening and majestic at the same time
in a way that no concretely designed physical world
can ever be.
This is imagery.
This is visual metaphor.
There's doubtless plenty of theory-crafting
in Souls lore circles
about who the woman with the spinning wheel is
when you're told everything you need to know
in just how she's presented here.
She's deliberately evocative
of the fortune-telling spirits with spinning wheels
that exist seemingly throughout
human mythology and folklore.
More specifically,
this character appears to be a reference
to one of the most popular portrayals
of this type of character in film history,
the one that appears in Akira Kurosawa's
Throne of Blood,
also known as Spider-Web Castle.
Throne of Blood is an adaptation of Macbeth.
In case you haven't heard of Macbeth,
Macbeth's about a happy-go-lucky guy
whose destiny is to become king,
but it turns out being the king
isn't all it's cracked up to be.
["Spider-Web Castle"]
Interestingly enough,
right before the character
who's a reference to Spider-Web Castle,
just to make sure you know they get it,
they've just put a spider right there.
The appearance of a character
seemingly straight out of this film,
a film about the darkness befalling people
whose destiny is to rule,
is a better piece of storytelling
than all the item descriptions
and all the loot drops in the world.
But because it relies on
understanding of imagery
outside of video games
and visual storytelling,
none of this information can be found
on any wiki about the story of the Souls series.
In a way,
the story of Dark Souls 2
is the ultimate in nerd horror.
It tells a story of a universe
it's impossible to build
a comprehensive fucking wiki about.
And to nerds,
that's the scariest thing there is.
This opening proceeds into
a series of destroyed castles,
ruined thrones,
mad, dead kings.
When you finally get your own throne,
there's a worrying ambivalence to it.
The best Dark Souls 1 could muster
was having sad music
play over the last boss,
and if you look at Jimmy's pants,
it tells you how bad he was
when he was a kid.
Dark Souls 2 puts you
into the role of the last boss,
becoming patriarch of a world
on its way to its doom,
ultimately failing to achieve anything.
And it asks you how you feel about that
and where you go from here.
The pacing of Dark Souls 1
wasn't great after the Lordvessel,
but it did a lot more with a lot less
when it came to its plot.
Its introductory video set up the world
and the major players very efficiently.
Efficient storytelling is being placed over
good storytelling,
or even a good story.
I think gamers on the whole
are still kind of enamored
with a wikipedia-style approach to storytelling,
where everything can be concretely pieced together
in an objective narrative,
when really I think there's a lot of other ways
you can explore a story.
The intro video to Dark Souls 2
shows the main character dropping
into some kind of whirlpool
because the old lady tells us we're cursed
and the only hope of a cure
is to go to Drangleic for some reason.
She actually says we'll have no idea
why we're going to do
any of the stuff we're about to do.
This visual metaphor for falling into darkness,
you know,
the thing that going hollow does to your mind,
is reduced to falling into
some kind of whirlpool.
A woman visually coded
as having the power to see the future,
predicting a horrible fate
in which we do things
without fully understanding their purpose
because we lose our minds,
is reduced to
the old lady
telling us to go to Drangleic
for some reason.
No wonder this critical approach to storytelling
resulted in finding the story lacking.
No, this is just an old lady
telling us to do things
for some reason.
There's no nuance or meaning
or cinematic language being utilized here.
That level of understanding
has no place in my
nuanced critique of a video game.
New Game Plus is the bad ending.
You press a button and admit
that all that's left
is for everything to happen again.
There's another ending,
which came out when all the DLCs had come out
and also adds a new character.
I think this aspect of the story
is interesting in its own way,
but I don't like how people use it
as an excuse to criticize Dark Souls 2,
pretending there wasn't enough story
in the initial release
and this is an admission of that
and they're finally fixing it,
or they're patching the story in
in post or something.
There's plenty of story,
but just not the kind everyone wanted.
For me, it was already complete
in its incompleteness,
but giving the player the option
of getting an ending
where they beat another boss
and walk out is a nice little bonus.
It's a nice extra little thing
to give people and that's all right.
The DLC to Dark Souls 2 is fantastic.
Each one experiments with mechanics
in cool and interesting ways
I don't want to get too far into
because we're already pressed for time.
Rest assured they're all lengthy enough
to feel like worthwhile additions.
I'll rattle off the fun stuff I really liked.
I like Broom Tower's verticality
and the way you unlocked more access
from the central hub
once you got the key wedge thing.
I like Crown of the Old Iron King's gimmick
of having the first boss
and the Iron King himself
be just to your left when you come in
and you can take a series
of looping paths around
to make the first boss visible
then go around again
once the ice melts
to gain access to more soldiers
for the Old Iron King fight.
You could find and build a little army
to help you even out the odds
and that's really cool.
I like the puzzles that require you
to actually use a bow to progress.
The Souls games, when it comes down to it,
are something of an offshoot from Zelda
and its attempt to bring some honest-to-god
bow-and-arrow puzzles to the game.
It was unexpected,
but it fit together quite well.
I like these ghost guys
who look like phantoms you see online.
It actually trips you up
when you discover they're real
and they attack you.
It makes for a cool fakeout
I just spoiled for you,
so I hope you already played this bit.
Sin the Slumbering Dragon is a hard fight,
but the first really fun fight with a dragon
in basically any of these games
for me personally,
especially after the optional
Ancient Dragon fight
which is honestly a chore.
In many ways, the DLC embodies
Dark Souls 2 in microcosm,
being willing to go all the way
and experimenting with its mechanics
to create new and unique areas,
and in doing so,
it also comes to embody
the very best the Souls series
has to offer as a whole.
It's everything that I think I ever wanted
from a Souls game,
and it's part of Dark Souls 2,
so Dark Souls 2 wins.
Scholar of the First Sin is a second edition
of Dark Souls 2 that came out
nearly two years ago now.
It bundled together the DLCs
for the original release of the game,
had some graphical and performance updates,
and put the items that grant access to the DLC
in the world itself
as things to find
instead of items you simply start with
if you owned the DLC
in the previous version.
This version's really interesting.
I'm not going to say good,
interesting.
Instead of a simple,
slightly visually improved bundle,
it actually dramatically changes
most of the game.
Almost all of the enemy encounters
and placements have been altered,
and the amount of enemies
has overall increased massively.
I've played Dark Souls 2 multiple times
before playing this version,
and I found it to be very different
and much harder
despite superficially being the same game.
It's more frustrating too.
A lot of people didn't like
the amount of enemies
you often fight at once in Dark Souls 2,
something I didn't have a problem with
in that game,
but in this it's definitely difficult
enough to be annoying
even if you know how to deal
with groups in this engine.
Honestly,
the game this reminds me of the most
is Super Mario Bros. 2.
The Japanese Mario 2
is like an optional harder Mario game,
pushing the engine
and player skill requirements
to the absolute limit
before it becomes unsellable
as a consumer product.
Heck,
they didn't even bother selling it
in the West for a reason.
I'd call Scholar a pretty good game.
It's challenging,
it's entertainingly funny in places,
and it's a nice way of playing a game
I love dearly
in a new, remixed way.
However,
I have to qualify calling it good.
It's good only within
the context of Dark Souls 2
already existing,
of there being about a year
of playing the original version
to prepare for this one.
I would not recommend this game
to anyone as a first game in the series,
which for some people
this might have saddeningly been.
It's for people who are diehard fans
of the series already
or even just fans of 2 specifically,
and for those people,
even when it's not fun,
it's fun as an entertaining
little experiment
with a bunch of aspects of the game
tweaked just enough.
It feels almost like a ROM hack
of Dark Souls 2
they made for fun,
and for some people
that might be a condemnation,
especially considering
it's the cost of a full-priced game.
So I can't heartily recommend it,
but the Soul games are quite difficult
to recommend already.
Something I like specifically
is the entrance to the Earthen Peak
from Harvest Valley.
There's a couple of enemies
in the original,
but it seems quite underutilized,
like it's a short, quick rush
through an area that could be
more fleshed out.
In Scholar,
it's significantly altered.
There's way more enemies,
it's way more difficult,
there's purposeful traps
for if you try and run past,
and it has more enemy types
that appear in, like,
two places in the original game,
which is nice.
There are also more
Hidey Nights in general,
which is great
and something I wanted,
and also they're way more aggressive.
Some of them get up
and go for you now,
and that's a really cool thing
that you just don't expect
if you play the original,
and that's really, really fun.
Also, something I quite like
about both games
is that in each one,
someone's credentials
are called into question.
In the original,
in Hidey's Tower,
the Dragon Rider looked
like an idiot.
There were no dragons
anywhere for most of the game.
Why is he called the Dragon Rider?
What?
That's ridiculous.
The guy's obviously lying.
But in Scholar,
it's the Dragon Slayer
just over the way from him
who's clearly lying on his resume.
There's a dragon right outside
his fucking office!
Don't get the Scholar edition
unless you similarly
really like two already
and don't approach it
as its own game per se,
but as another way
of playing a game
you already liked
for what it was doing,
and you'll probably
have a good time.
I honestly want to see
more games like this.
I would have liked
a similar edition
along these lines
for every Souls game,
to be honest.
Wait, wait.
Hold on a second.
Obviously,
a lot of game criticism
is based on subjective experience,
which can't exactly
be proven wrong,
sadly,
but that's not what
I'm trying to do here.
My aim as a critic
isn't just to try and find ways
of looking at and analyzing games
and their design
that are useful
and help in forming
better ideas of quality,
but also to try and understand
and explain why
other people reacted differently.
I've had some pushback
from people on some of my
long game analysis videos,
usually by people who enjoyed
a game I was being critical about
or didn't enjoy a game I liked
or who played the game
a way I said was wrong
and happened to like it.
I in no way mean to diminish
other people's experiences
of a game.
If you didn't like something,
I can't reason you
into liking it.
My aim is to understand
why people do or don't
like something
and learn from that
and use the information
in my work.
I've gone on record
as thinking the Souls games
are all very good,
but that doesn't make
other people not liking them
or not thinking that wrong.
They're useful because
you learn why people
wouldn't enjoy something,
and that's really helpful
if you, for example,
are interested in what makes
a game fun to a lot of people,
which is really financially
lucrative nowadays.
I feel the games got better
at correcting the sort of problems
that caused not a lot of people
to enjoy them early on,
at least without a lot of friction
at the start,
and somewhat interestingly,
helped them go back
and appreciate the previous ones.
Everyone's entitled
to their opinion,
and in my opinion,
every other game critic
is stupid.
Okay, I can't even
make that joke here.
You see,
the overly negative
critical response
from Souls diehards
and some spheres of the internet
isn't even accurate
to what most game critics said
when the game first came out.
On the whole,
people loved it.
The misgivings came specifically
from folks like Matthew Matosis
and the popularity of his video
predicated centrally
on how the game couldn't possibly
be as good as the first
because Miyazaki didn't make it
and locking on in some fights
isn't a good idea
and the opening cutscene
didn't talk about a war
that already happened
and has no effect on us
as a player.
Ignore how,
in Dark Souls 2,
there's a similar ancient war
in the distant past,
but you get to learn about it
over the course of the game
instead of a pre-rendered cutscene
at the beginning,
and then you get to actually
go fight in it?!
Critics at the time of release
liked it a lot,
the exact same way
critics liked Demon's Souls
a lot back when this whole series
was new and strange
and not many people played
or liked it.
People who think about games a lot
are more likely to easily
get into a new experience
than people who just play them
as a hobby.
Internet critics like Yahtzee
wiped their ass
all over various aspects
of the games
that would later say
they loved when audiences
started to get a hang of the games
and it turned out
they were talking bollocks.
Fuck you, Demon's Souls.
A challenge is one thing,
but trying to break down
a fucking cement wall
with your forehead
isn't a challenge,
it's grounds for getting
fucking sectioned.
Demon's Souls is one of the most
rewarding, challenging games
ever to hit the PS3.
It may not be for everyone,
but I still urge everyone
to at least try it.
And GameSpot's 2009 game
of the year is...
Demon's Souls.
Demon's Souls is like
nothing you've ever played.
Do you hear that?
It was the best
and most innovative game
of 2009.
That's Kevin Van Flipping Ord.
That's the thought criminal
who was so wrong
about Fallout 3
he was found dead
in his cell last year
next to an apology
written in my blood.
Even he has been
on the ground floor
of the Souls series
since day one.
It turns out that
professional game critics
are quite often
more ahead of the curb
than the average consumer
or the not-to-be-rude
fanboy types
who will dismiss a sequel
for being too different
to the one they first
fell in love with.
Mainstream game critics
can be wrong,
but they've been consistently
right about the Souls series
from day one.
It's only corners of the internet
full of rose-tinted fanboyishness
towards the first Dark Souls
that result in the ridiculous
treatment of the second game.
When it comes down to it,
Dark Souls was
a fantastic game,
even though it's flawed
in a lot of ways
that are so much more obvious
now than ever.
I think the sheer surprise
of how good Dark Souls was
after most people
missed the boat on Demon's Souls
made it a hard act to follow
and lots of fans got
unrealistic expectations about it.
The online response to Dark Souls 3
sounds overall lukewarm
but positive,
and I think that might be because
at least in regards to this one series,
maybe not a couple others,
people have cooled
and learned to manage
their expectations.
I'm interested in finally
getting to play it
after working for so long
on videos about the games
that preceded it.
I'm a little worried
that the fan reaction
to some aspects of 2
made them walk back
on the good ideas
in an effort to be more like
the first one,
but I'm gonna play it
and judge it on its own merits
as its own game
before I really consider that.
In the meantime,
Dark Souls 2 is not perfect,
but you can have
a grand old time with it.
The gameplay contains
some of the tightest moments
in the whole series
and some really fun variations
on the formula.
It tells a story
that instead of redoing
the original
or trying to build on it
in a straightforward way,
self-consciously explores
what it means to exist
in a specific position
in gaming culture
and asks us
what the things we desire
from games
say about us.
I really enjoyed Dark Souls 2,
and I think there's a lot of things
that make it good,
and if you didn't enjoy it,
that's okay.
Your different opinions
and experiences
are equally as valid,
and I know I talk
authoritatively sometimes,
but I hope it's clear
I'm just offering my opinion
in a way I think is interesting
or convincing,
and it's okay to disagree with me.
For now.
[♪ Music ♪
Thanks so much for watching
this really long addendum
to a super long video.
Making this kind of criticism
takes a ridiculous amount
of time and effort,
and it always takes
so much longer
than I think it will,
so I really would like
to thank my patrons
for keeping me in spaghetti
and moisturizer while I work.
In addition to the names
going past the screen right now,
I'd especially like to thank
Gabriel Mann,
Aislinn,
GetDunkedOn,
CommissarTaco,
TheCameo,
Joseph Greco,
Evan Ritchie,
Jakutja Boris,
Eugene Butler,
Silas Pumpkins,
Siegfried,
Slayer of the Immortal Dragon,
Mr. Clonem,
Alex Lemkevich,
Chiboi Kami Kensei,
Olivia Mello,
Brennan Arts,
Malarkey Bingo,
Daniel Vincent Chilton,
Scarthorax,
Lord of the Roaches,
Kelly M. Kanipi,
Requiem,
Emily O,
Owen Piper,
Garand,
Parker Anderson,
Dylan Tompkins,
Eitan Goldstrom,
Caleb McMurphy,
Amy Lech,
Spilt Coffee,
Jenny Angel,
Zachariah Scott,
Renee Larshaug,
Thomas Kistner,
Jack Harvey,
David DeMarzallou,
David the Benevolent Malevolence,
John Cantwell,
Procore.
He's changed it again.
A huge pair of blue spheres
on a flacid penis.
He's spelt flacid wrong now.
Corwin Light-Williams,
Sean Kemp,
Shadowbag,
Findlay Bowick-Copley,
Morn Silverplatz-Toonstrom.
I hope I got that right.
Kay Plays Dota,
Jeffrey Theobald,
Tom Martell,
Dipshit Chris,
Scott Gertin,
A Mysterious Benefactor,
Lissy Roberts,
Disciple,
Toru Kun No. 1,
Three-Fifths of a Brain,
Lauren Tacticos,
Mackenzie Cockerill,
Ash Stryker,
Claw Su,
Daniel Stewart,
Anna S,
CASEY EXPLOSION!
Young Cowrie,
Clementine,
Sol,
Eric Hunter,
Marco Shard,
Jan Anders Bremer,
WEABOO GAMING!
Gary Marshall,
Aidan Bradley,
Graf and Blackpaw,
Alexander Corbett,
Sammy J,
Luke Swanson,
Fully Automated Queer Gay Cuck Space Communism,
Zachary Clark,
Benjamin Davidson,
Jay Logan,
Hero R. War,
Jason Walter,
PolarWolf98,
Luke Gould,
Kieran,
Recovering Zombie,
Thadwa Zalewski,
Bill Mock,
Mike Stanley,
Feral Kimchi,
Caden Patin,
Elliot Soden,
Jordan Tullis,
Apilius Bulge,
Jerry Terry,
David Rose,
Sean Higgins,
Davis Remy,
Nathan Hoar,
Philip Huber,
Kaphzyl,
Poggington Jones,
Lady Naga,
Richard Pearson,
Rebecca Washam,
Sarik,
Ricard Hevosmar,
Julius Niborg-Oleson,
Samael,
Brock Barber,
Justin Conkerbeard,
Alicia Parker Martell,
Femininja,
Skeptical Frog,
Cav P,
Robert Phillips,
and Sled.
If you've made it this far,
you either listened to the credits like a true believer,
or guessed correctly I'd put something after the credits and skipped ahead,
like a meanie.
In any case,
the time has come to tally up the votes from the secret vote I held at the end of the Bloodborne video.
Let's see which one won.
Drumroll, please.
Oh, I have to edit that in myself, don't I?
(*drumroll*)
(*ding*)
(*thud*)
(*sigh*)
Ah, fuck it. Deus Ex. Let's do that one.
