In the first two videos we looked at the age of our universe
but how do we know the age of the earth and the ages of the rocks it contains?
Fortunately there are a number of different techniques
and they can all be checked against each other and they all tell us the same story.
Let's start with the benchmark, comparative dating.
The golden rule is that newer sedimentary deposits are always laid on
top of
older ones so except where rocks have been folded
this orange bed would be older than the green one and the green one is older
than the blue one.
Geologists can then follow a single bed to make similar deductions in a
different locality.
The dark grey bed may be at the surface
or even at a higher point than the others but it's older than all of them
and the light grey bed is older still. What we end up with
is what's called the geological column. To get the absolute dates of these rocks
scientists use a variety of different methods. I'll start with one of the
easiest and most recent.
We all know trees have rings because in summer they grow faster than in winter
but seasonal growing conditions vary according to the weather
so the bands will vary in size. Each time period in each geographical location
has its own distinctive pattern of tree rings like a fingerprint.
So if we take wood of a known age we can match the oldest part of it
with the youngest part of another piece of wood and so on back through time.
Our upper atmosphere is constantly being bombarded by neutrons from the Sun.
When one of them hits a nitrogen atom in the air it knocks off a proton
changing the atom from nitrogen into carbon. But this is a heavy and unstable
form of carbon called carbon 14
or C14. The normal form of carbon
is C12. In the atmosphere C14 combines with oxygen to make carbon dioxide
which is then absorbed by plants and into the bodies of
animals that eat the plants. The ratio of these two isotopes in animals and plants
is roughly the same as the ratio in the atmosphere around them.
But when the animal or plant dies C14 decays over time
and reverts back to nitrogen. So compared to C12 which doesn't change
the amount of C14 falls at a constant measurable rate.
By measuring this ratio inside the dead animal or plant
scientists can find out when it died. Before I look at other dating techniques
I'll bat a few hoary old myths about carbon 14
out of the ballpark. No it's not.
That's like saying cars don't work because sometimes drivers get lost.
Carbon dating works fine but if the wrong stuff gets analyzed then you'll
end up getting the wrong date.
So if there's bacteria or mold or any kind of contamination on the sample
the date will be wrong. If the results aren't calibrated properly
the results will be wrong. And in some environments carbon dating is
impractical
so the results will be wrong. But when everything's done properly
the results are right. That's no different to any sophisticated analysis
technique
from x-ray imaging to spectroscopy. Contaminated samples don't invalidate
the principle of DNA analysis
or chromatography or spectroscopy. We know they work
and we know carbon dating works. Firstly carbon dating can be checked against
artifacts of known age
such as ship's timber. Secondly it can be checked by sending the same artifact to
different labs for analysis.
Thirdly let's take a sample of organic material from each of these layers.
If carbon dating was random nonsense you'd expect the chronological
order of these samples to be all over the place but that doesn't happen.
The results show each of these samples in its correct chronological
order. The ones from the upper beds are younger and the ones from the lower beds
are older.
Is it magic or is it because carbon dating works
and that's why it's used?
Samples don't come with labels attached telling the lab their age.
Testing is always blind. If it's not blind
it's not science.
But carbon dating isn't used on diamonds and coal and for very good reason.
As I explained C14 is formed when neutrons collide with nitrogen atoms.
The C14 used in carbon dating originated in the atmosphere
but you can also get it deep underground in places where decaying uranium
is giving off neutrons. Coal and diamonds are made of carbon
so you'd expect to find higher levels of C14
in coal and diamonds close to rocks that contain uranium
and much lower levels away from those rocks. And that's exactly what we do find.
Carbon dating is only used and only useful
for dating organic material in the top most sedimentary layers.
Now that we've got carbon dating out of the way let's quickly run through a few
more
absolute dating methods. Biologists know that human DNA mutates at a fairly
regular rate
and they can trace these mutations back like following the branches of a tree
back to the trunk. It's not a greatly accurate method but it does give a rough
idea of when humans migrated
and a very definite idea of where.
Africa around 50,000 years ago just as
other dating methods suggested it should. Every 250,000 years or so
the Earth's magnetic fields flip over and the South Pole becomes the North Pole.
Magnetized minerals within rocks show the polarity of the Earth when the rocks
were laid down
so throughout the geological column rocks show a regular magnetic banding
depending on the polarity of the Earth and that can be dated.
Potassium-argon dating works on the same principle as carbon dating
but instead of carbon decaying to nitrogen we have potassium decaying to
argon
and instead of a half-life of 5,500 years
we have a half-life of 1.3 billion years.
That means the method can be used for dating rocks and fossils hundreds of
millions of years old.
The technique has largely been replaced with the far more accurate
argon-argon method and there are other decay processes that can be measured
each with different half-lives such as uranium thorium
and rubidium strontium. Radiometric dating takes us back to the
oldest rocks we found on Earth 3.8 billion years old.
If you want to go back even further you have to look into space.
My video The History of the Universe Made Easy explains how we can calculate
the age of stars and galaxies so I won't repeat that here.
Just take a look at the video. What's important is that the results fit
perfectly with the chronology we find on Earth. The Sun for example
doesn't turn out to be younger than the Earth or older than the universe.
Its age based on the amount of hydrogen fused into helium
is exactly what you'd expect and as with dating methods devised for rocks on Earth
the method for measuring the age of stars and galaxies
is devised first and tested afterwards. There's no way of knowing in advance
what age these tests will show
but every time the age confirms the known chronology of our world.
There's thermoluminescence that can measure the number of trapped electrons
on the surface of volcanic rock.
The speed that continents are drifting can be measured today
so their position millions of years ago can be calculated.
It matches perfectly with the geological chronology we've already worked out.
Climatic banding in sedimentary rocks can be measured
caused by a wobble in the Earth's motion every 12,000 years.
I could go on but there's no time here to list every dating method
let alone spell out the details of how they work.
The important thing is that they do work and attempts to show that they don't
have all been spectacular failures.
I've heard quite a few urban myths about these dating methods.
Here are a few you may have heard.
Yes this really did happen. Because of the rate of radioactive decay
which is very slow, this method can't be used on rocks less than 100,000 years old.
That's very young in geological terms so most volcanic rocks can be dated using
this method
and it works very well. But subjecting a sample of new rock to this dating method
is rather like weighing an elephant on the kitchen scales.
Any result you get is going to be garbage. Actually the best way to date
young volcanic rock samples
is thermoluminescence. Obviously if you want an inaccurate result
well then choose the wrong test and that's just what you're going to get.
This urban myth comes from a bogus test that was performed in 1990
on four fossilized dinosaur bones. The bones came from a museum
and were heavily coated in preservative resin. Hugh Miller
who commissioned these tests was told by the testing laboratory in Arizona
that there was no carbon in the bones so they couldn't be carbon dated.
Now that's one of the most basic principles of carbon dating.
You obviously have to have carbon in the samples and dinosaur bones are so old
the carbon has nearly always been replaced by minerals
as was the case with these samples. The laboratory warned Miller that carbon in
the preservative resin would be measured
not the dinosaur fossil which of course has no carbon in it.
But Miller wanted to do the test anyway. I guess so he could pretend he had
20,000 year old dinosaur bones
and he got the result he wanted. I suppose he could just as well have
spread jam on the fossils
and pretended that they were five years old.
One of the golden rules about carbon dating is that you can't carbon date
marine organisms
and there's a very good reason for that. The further away you get from
atmospheric carbon the less reliable the results and the carbon that goes into
marine organisms is very far removed from the atmosphere.
So carbon dating is useless. In the 1960s one of the biologists who
discovered this phenomenon
known as the reservoir effect warned other biologists about it in a
scientific paper.
To illustrate the point he carbon dated live snails and the result was two
thousand three hundred years.
But while biologists have heeded the lesson and no longer carbon date marine
organisms
the false dating has passed into urban mythology as proof that carbon dating
doesn't work.
So the simple answer to that is on marine organisms
it doesn't. On land it does. So not only do we have the intelligence to work out
what happened in the past
we also have a number of tools to work out when it happened.
And if anyone thinks these tools don't work they shouldn't have to mislead or
cheat.
Just send samples of known age to a lab, ask the technicians to perform the
appropriate test on the material
and see if they come up with the right answer. It's so easy to do
you have to wonder why the skeptics don't dare do it.
