Is my hairline receding?
I mean, it's definitely receding.
I've been asking myself this question for 3,527 consecutive days, but it's getting undeniable.
Look at that.
It feels smooth here.
It didn't used to feel smooth here.
Well, let's do the topographic analysis.
It's 4.2 centimeters by 2.8.
Consult the records.
Yeah, the measurements show a 50% areal increase in temporal recession over the last 5 years.
The numbers don't lie, girl.
The numbers don't lie.
The Norwood-Hamilton scale is the generally accepted measure of the extent of androgenetic
alopecia, more commonly known as male pattern baldness.
The first indication of inevitable and irreversible hair loss is Norwood-Hamilton stage 2, characterized
by a 50% areal increase in temporal recession over the course of about 5 years.
Once Norwood-Hamilton stage 2 is complete, the balding process will continue until you
die, when your corpse will rot on the ground and worms will eat your eyeballs.
Doctors agree that men who allow themselves to reach this stage can never become real
women, have no value, and will never be loved.
Never be loved.
Never be loved.
Never be loved.
Never be loved.
Never be loved.
Never be loved.
Never be loved.
Well, that's it.
It's over for me.
At this point, the only sensible option is... suicide.
Just put a bullet to the brain stem.
I mean, that's the only responsible way to go about this.
If you go in through the mouth, you should be able to nail the medulla right in the center.
Shouldn't take more than a couple seconds.
Bit of a mess, though.
A mess that someone else is going to have to clean up.
And that is not a very nice thing to do to someone.
So I guess I am stuck being alive.
God damn it.
God, you're ugly.
And old.
Can we talk about how old you're getting?
What are these lines?
Ugh, how do I get out of this?
How do I opt out of my own consciousness?
Well, how about this?
I change my name, take ten ambience, bash myself over the head, and pass out on the
next plane to the Dominican Republic.
Oh my god, you cannot just run away to a Caribbean island and escape all your problems.
These are not physical problems, these are problems of the mind.
I mean, am I even actually balding?
Am I just a lunatic?
Are these real measurements, or are these the psychotic scribbles of a delusional transvestite?
You know what?
I don't know, and I don't care.
How can I have spent so much time thinking about this?
This is nothing but vanity.
Don't you have anything more important to think about?
You shallow bitch.
You shallow bitch.
Oh, but that's a lie, and you know it's a lie.
The human mind is trash.
Hair is what really matters.
Is my hairline receding?
So, I hear you're having some problems with your...genital.
That's right.
Great, great.
Well, we better take a look.
Could you just remove your...
Alright, let's see what we've got here.
My god, it's not even human.
Well, what's wrong with it?
Have you taken any recent trips to the outer solar system?
What?
No.
Well, we can't entirely rule out Cronenberg's disease, but I'd say it's more likely that
you have what we in the medical profession call xenomorphic gender parasitosis.
What does that mean?
It means a parasite from outer space has infected your gender and is eating away at
it from the inside.
Let's watch an instructional video to learn more.
Oh, and try to pay attention.
Oh.
Oh.
Ah.
Ah.
Ah.
Ah.
Ah.
Ah.
Ah.
Ah.
Well, that certainly cleared things up.
Indeed. Now, while there is no cure for XGP, there are a range of treatment options available.
So, you're saying I need surgery to affirm the woman I've always been?
No, I'm saying we're going to make you into a man.
How are you going to make me a man?
Simple. Testosterone gas.
Oh, and I'm going to play you Wagner and show you films of manly men until your perversion goes into remission.
Wait, hold on. I don't consent to that.
Shh. You'll soon be fixed.
Fritz, the music, please.
Oh, please don't do that. Please don't.
Get out of there.
Ah.
Ah.
Ah.
Ah.
Ah.
I don't know how to talk like a girl.
Every time I try, all that comes out is the voice of an annoying white bitch.
Can I speak with a manager?
This mimosa doesn't have enough booze in it.
Is this butt plug 100% silicone?
Maybe that's just who I am deep inside. An annoying white bitch.
But of course I inevitably end up slipping back into the creepy cross-dresser voice that I actually have.
Let's go to the club and meet some boys.
So I can fuck them.
God damn it. What do real women talk like? What do real men talk like? What does anybody talk like?
What are these horrible goddamn noises coming out of my mouth?
Socrates, what is talking?
What am I going to do with this baritone voice of mine?
Well, I guess the same thing I do about everything.
I woke up this morning, I got myself a beer.
I woke up this morning, I got myself a beer.
The future's uncertain, the end is always near.
Let it roll, baby, roll.
Let it roll all night long.
Let it roll all night long.
Let it roll all night long.
Why do I have hair here? Ugh, disgusting.
It's not even human hair. It's like insect hair.
Well, how do you feel?
Well, I think I'm into dudes now.
The problem is your attitude. If you won't act like a man, how can you think like a man?
And if you won't think like a man, how can you feel like a man?
I don't want to feel like a man.
Why can't you just be a man?
Be a man. Be a man.
This looks good.
If I don't move my arms.
Is there a way to smash my ribs in?
I'll smash him in, I'll smash the shit out of him.
These shoes are cute and I'll finally be able to hit my head on the tops of door frames.
Would you fuck me?
I wouldn't.
Why won't you fuck me?
I don't want to.
Why not?
It makes me feel like a man.
You are a man.
Well, I don't want to be.
What does it even mean to feel like a man?
Well, don't you feel like a woman?
No, I feel like myself.
Well, exactly.
Are you sure you're not just gay?
Yeah, that's what it is. I'm extremely gay.
Alright, well, I'm leaving. Bye.
Thanks for watching!
Thanks for watching!
Thanks for watching!
Is this even real?
