Hello, and welcome to my first ever attempt at broadcasting a live debate. Fittingly,
the topic is, is it worthwhile to broadcast live debates? And my guest is Ollie, one of
my favorite YouTubers who runs a channel called Philosophy Tube. Link is in the description,
please go check it out. And Ollie, you want to introduce yourself?
Well, yeah, thank you very much for having me on, Nick. As you say, I run a channel called
Philosophy Tube. I do like a 10 minute or so video every week teaching philosophy. When
the British government tripled tuition fees, I decided I'd give away my degree for free
online. So that's what I do. And I'm a long time follower of your work as well, an admirer of it.
Thank you. Yeah, it's funny that you say give away your work for free, because in a sense,
that's also the way I think of what I do, is that I feel that I've been given this kind of
gift of an education from society. And I do feel some obligation to just like, give it out for
free. Because one of the frustrations I think of being in university is how elitist it is and how
much money you have to pay to get access to that information. But anyway, so we're talking about
whether debate is worthwhile. So I thought I'd start just by saying a little bit about why this
topic seems like it needs to be discussed. So I think debate is something that has kind of this
important role in our discourse. We think of it as this cornerstone of democracy. It's something
that we hold up as a way of finding out what is true. But I think in most of our personal
experiences, we know that that's not always the case. Debate seems to have this element of
performance. It seems to often rely on things like people's personal appearance and how likable a
person is, things that have nothing to do with what is true or who's correct. So the question
that's raised is debate as important as we say it is. And it's something that I've been asking
myself recently as I've been doing debates and discussions with conservatives or far-right people
on YouTube. And a lot of people on the left have kind of questioned whether I'm smart to do that.
And the criticism ranges from minor criticism, like you're putting yourself through a lot of
emotional agony for the sake of little benefit, to outright you're doing the wrong thing. You're
giving a platform to people who shouldn't have a platform. Stop doing this. So I don't know. Do
you come to this with a position that you hold in general on the utility of debate?
I don't know. I mean, I come to it with a little bit of personal experience. So I, at my uni,
we were talking about elite institutions, there was a fairly high-flying debate society that I
went along to occasionally, and didn't really find it a massively useful use of my Wednesday
nights. I did win a prize there once, because I deliberately gave a speech that contained an
argument that I knew didn't work. And then they gave me the prize for that speech. And I was like,
probably not going to come anymore, guys. So it was fun. But I don't know, it's interesting. I mean,
the kicker is, is it the way to truth? And I'm not sure it always is. It can be, certainly. But
yeah, I don't think it is always the way to truth for the reasons that you mentioned, because it is
kind of, it can become a grandstanding thing. People can sort of play to the audience a bit
too much. And it can be influenced by things that people have, sort of, that aren't really
relevant to the points, like dress and so on, and likeability and charisma. And so, yeah, I'd
certainly, I mean, if the question is, is it important? I'd say, yeah, yeah, it depends what
you mean by important. It's very important in some senses. But is it the way to truth always,
necessarily? I'm inclined to think maybe not. But I don't know. Maybe, yeah, I'm kind of,
because this is something I'm wondering about at the moment, rather than coming at it directly with
a point I want to argue. I'm living the question, as we say in acting. Because, yeah.
So hang on one second, I'm gonna respond to that. I feel that I may have somehow the
permalink to this debate may have gotten public because a couple people have suddenly added into
this Google Hangout. So I'm gonna make sure that I didn't tweet that link or something stupid like
that. Did I? Was that me? Oh, yeah, maybe it was you. Oops. You might want to delete that tweet.
Okay. Yeah. Okay. I think, okay, hopefully we're good. Otherwise,
we're gonna be inviting random people. Well, which could also be interesting. We can debate
them. But anyway, yeah, so I think bringing up the formal debate society is like, that is kind
of an important point to raise. Because when you have formal debates, people are often assigned
which position of the debate to take. So I know when the high school debate teams and so on,
you win by being the most persuasive. But of course, people don't choose what they're arguing.
So there's a kind of culture that revolves around debate societies or around a professional debate
that involves simply having the greatest rhetoric, not being true. So, I mean,
Classes and so on will sort of have classes in providing sample arguments rather than saying,
you find out whether or not you're correct. It's kind of, the classes are given in light,
as you say, in the rhetoric. And that's kind of weird and interesting. And the fact that,
and how do you measure how persuasive someone is? How do you do that without,
I mean, you have to have like a control group, like a blank audience who know nothing about
anything. And then it's kind of sent in and it's like, who do you agree with? I don't know,
the guy in the red tie, I don't know. So how do you measure how persuasive someone is?
I've actually never been involved in a formal debate team, like in that kind of competitive
environment or competitive debate. What my understanding of the way that works is,
they have judges and judges evaluate arguments. I assume that those evaluations include things
like checking for logical fallacies and things like that, so that the guidelines would include
that the reasoning is sound. But if, I mean, this is not how, for instance, a presidential debate
in the US on CNN gets judged. In fact, in the last few presidential elections, they've,
I don't know if they do this in the UK too, but in the televised coverage of the debates,
they'll include this feature where it sort of shows the audience reaction, like in live time.
So you'll have like, it's like a line graph that's plotted by like how much people agree or
disagree with what the person is saying. Right, right. So if someone starts saying like,
like, hooray for the troops, like I support the troops, the line graph starts going up and up and
up. And if they start saying like, I don't know, no politician would say this, but if they say,
just because you give someone a gun doesn't make them a hero. The graph bottoms out,
everyone hates them. But this purely empirical way of evaluating debate, but both based on
public perception, that seems like a real problem. Because, I mean, the famous instance in the US is
this JFK-Nixon debate, or the first debate where Nixon was like sweaty and not very appealing to
the TV audience. And JFK obviously is this handsome presidential charismatic figure. And so
the perception is very much of the JFP is more presidential and more, you know, so it's
there's a performance art to it. And some of it does have to do with the way you look and so on.
But it's maybe a useful performance, right? I mean, it's in a way, any kind of rhetoric
sometimes can go beyond, rhetoric can be evaluated independently of how true the rhetoric,
independent of the truth of what's being said. So, but you wouldn't want to say that don't have
good rhetoric, because it doesn't have to do with truth. So debating still might be a skill worth
cultivating. Oh, absolutely. And certainly, I've found, like, in acting, this was like what I do,
I'm an actor now. It's that the kind of experience I have of debating in formal debates was very
useful. And yeah, you're right, just because it's there's a sort of performance element to it
doesn't mean that it's not important. And that's kind of what I was into earlier on. And yeah,
it is interesting. I mean, one of the one of the things that's going on in the UK right now is that
we're about to have an election and then the current Prime Minister is not going to be
debating the leader of the main opposition party, Theresa May. She won't debate Jeremy Corbyn,
probably says what she says right now. And that, yeah, that's kind of very interesting.
I was like, why not? And everyone's wondering why she isn't. And some people are saying it's
because she's like, doesn't want to do like the Nixon thing of like, appearing to be a sort of
haunted mannequin. But you know, who knows? And yeah, it's very interesting.
Yeah, so I say when there's there's also something special that happens when someone refuses to
debate or they don't debate, this is usually taken to be like a sign that you Oh, like you,
your ideas won't hold up. Yeah, I get Yeah, I imagine you get that a lot.
I mean, I get it. Maybe less than other people get it, because I have a couple of times
shown up to do these debates. But I also think that there are legitimate reasons to not want
to debate and there are people who shouldn't be debated. So I think there's something to be said
for not debating, for instance, Milo Yiannopoulos. And I know that this is something that I'm
thinking of an article, this well known article by the feminists, Penny read about not debating
Milo, because he is someone who I think most of us think he doesn't really care. He's not interested
in what's true. He's a kind of performance artist. And if you're debating someone like that,
there's part of you that thinks that you've lost if you even show up, because you can't.
This idea of good faith comes up a lot to me too. For instance, as a criticism of my debating Blair
White, that there's a notion that she's someone who's not really willing to kind of meet halfway.
Or not necessarily meet halfway, but who's sort of not interested in
pursuing the truth in some sense. So there's some kind of performance art to it that goes beyond
that. So I think I retract saying meet halfway, because I think meet halfway is kind of a bullshit
thing to expect people to do, especially when you're debating people on the way far right.
You don't want to meet halfway on that. But I think that you use the term rap battle
to describe one way of thinking of debate as a kind of performance art. And this is something
I see on YouTube too, the idea of debate as this kind of like, pwnage contest.
Yeah, I mean, I remember that you had that video, you had a video, it was really good. I forget
which one it was actually, but like, we were like, oh, he came in and like tore you apart,
like went in Socrates and you have panties and so on. It's just like, what is that really?
Is that really the path to truth? Or is it? I've quite been, there's a channel I've been
watching recently, Sean and Jen. I've quite been enjoying Sean and Jen's videos recently. I put it
on while I'm cooking just because I really enjoy Sean's voice. It's a great channel.
Yeah, yeah. And I have to confess, I don't go and watch the videos that Sean's,
Sean admirably says go and watch the videos to make sure I'm not misrepresenting. I do actually
just listen to Sean and Jen because I like Sean's voice. And I put it on while I'm cooking. So I
guess there's even a performative aspect to somebody like that, sort of trying to engage
in this debate. And then maybe it's, I'm just kind of refusing to take it as what it's meant to be.
Yeah, that is kind of interesting. Yeah. So I think like a debate in particular,
so the goal, I guess, what is the goal of debate? I mean, it's not really to persuade the other
person. I don't think that this is a big mistake to think that that's the goal of a debate. So
sometimes people criticize me for doing debates by saying, oh, don't argue with this person. Like,
they'll never persuade them. Well, of course someone persuade them. It's for the sake of
the audience. And so I think that I heard someone's, I forget who, I think this was just
like a random YouTube comment or something I saw. They said that the only thing debate can
accomplish is to make sure that two people aren't straw manning each other. And I think there's some
truth to that. It's sort of what you're doing when you have a debate with someone some of the
time is you're saying, it sounds to me like you're saying this thing that I think is horrible. And
then they say either, yeah, that is what I'm saying, but that's not horrible. Or they say,
no, you've misunderstood me. So in a sense, one of the things debate accomplishes is it sort of,
it helps, it gives people a chance to say that a straw man version of their claim isn't what
their claim is. I suppose, yeah. That might be a good use of it. I quite like that.
I remember somebody said something very intelligent to me this morning when I was
telling them about what I was going to be doing this tonight. They said,
it's quite odd that people would, because I'm sure you get commenters as I do, like demanding
debate saying, oh, this must be debated. Or once you say, you've said this, other YouTubers said
this, you should debate them. And this person said to me this morning, those comments are very
interesting because an intelligent person could infer debate. Like if I'm claiming X and somebody
else is claiming Y, then it's like, well, as long as we understand both claims, then we understand
that there's a debate there. It doesn't need necessarily to be this performative clash,
like tonight at eight, that's a royal rumble between, yeah. It's just kind of not really
required. So, right. This is like definitely a kind of philosophy way of thinking about things
too, is that you should, if you're good, be able to build up an argument based on what you know
two people to say, and you should be able to build, you could sort of an imaginative argument
between two people. And I sort of try to do that in some of, I do some videos where I will do a
kind of dialogue, like I did this Nazi punching video, where I had two sides, each of which I
thought had something of value to say. And I kind of tried to, instead of having an actual debate
about it, just I made a fictional one, where I sort of tried to imagine what, how the two ideas
of a person will clash. And anyone should be able to do this, if you know enough about the side that
you're saying. And some ways that maybe, yeah. And some ways that maybe, go ahead, go ahead.
I said, I suppose the risk of doing yourself and playing both roles, although I kind of as an actor
really appreciate the kind of theatricality of that, I suppose the risk would be somebody saying,
ah, but if it's just one person behind it, then you kind of, you're avoiding the straw manning
thing. So you might still be straw manning them. And I love the video.
The risk with that is you're then speaking for someone else, and so you're definitely a risk
of straw manning. But what you also can do is you can avoid this kind of tonight at nine,
clash of personalities thing. And that is what, to me, one of the most discouraging things about
the way people respond to debates is that when I say, when I've posted that I'm going to have
a discussion with a roaming millennial or whoever I'm talking to on YouTube, a lot of people do
respond with popcorn eating gifts and like, you get the sense that like, oh, they just want to
see this like shit show, go down. Because to avoid the kind of tonight at nine,
clash thing, it's like, well, that's just pints. Like, just go for pints, like, or just do this,
just have this. Like, it's just a chat. It doesn't need to be sponsored by whoever.
Just go have pints. Like, it's fine. But then there are plenty of people I wouldn't want to
have pints with. And I've had plenty of pints with people where it's gotten pretty heated. So
yeah. So I think that I love the idea of it being pints. I mean, I think that's not,
I think that's actually sort of the difference between discussion and debate. And I think on
YouTube, although actually, the debate society at my uni were pretty heavy drinkers as well.
When I was at Georgetown, there was something called the Philodemic Society, which was like
a bunch of LARPing, bougie, pretentious people who wanted to roleplay that they were at Cambridge
in the 1950s. God, they sucked. But not all of them.
LARPing, bougie, Cambridge.
Yeah, it was awful. But yeah, there was also a lot of drinking.
A lot of people going, no!
A lot of people who just love just like wearing a suit and projecting their voice.
Oh yeah, the debate society that was at my uni. It was suits and ties and gowns.
I used to go along, because they used to allow floor speeches at the end of the night.
So I was doing quite a lot of stand up comedy at the time. And I used to go along and just
do like five minutes of new material, just because I had a cast of audience who weren't allowed to,
like, they're not allowed to boo. They're only allowed to either say shame or resign.
And I'm like, that's inherently hilarious. So I used to go along and test out my material
and try and work it into the topic of it, just to mess with them. It's good fun.
Yeah, so but if a discussion is more worth having than debate, I think there's also,
maybe there's an issue that comes up a lot lately. Are there people not worth having
discussions with? I think the answer to this is clearly yes.
Especially in London, where it's five quid a pint. There are plenty of people.
Yeah, that's absolutely not worth it. But so I think that there has to, you know,
so to build a bridge, there has to be something to build a bridge to. There has to be
another person who's sort of genuinely interested in it. And they can't just be interested in
bullying you. They can't just be interested in making money. They can't just be a propagandist.
So for instance, I think there's no point having discussion with Richard Spencer,
as I've discussed at length with this point, because I think there's good,
very good reasons to say that nothing he says is genuine. And it's all kind of Trojan horse.
That's the thing, isn't it? Is that there are some, there are some, I mean, I did this in my
video on kind of white on white supremacist propaganda, which is greatly informed by your
video on your super video on white nationalism. Yeah, there are some points of view where it's
like if somebody says it's raining all the time, even when it's not raining,
it's like, oh, good. It's raining morning. It's like, what exactly does that mean in there?
And after a while, it kind of makes me start to wonder, well, what is this person really saying
here? If no amount of evidence can sort of convince hardcore Nazis that there really isn't
a worldwide Jewish conspiracy, then what are they really saying when they put forward that idea?
It's not really the idea that it's true. In which case, I'm kind of wasting my breath trying to
show them that it's not. Yeah. And unfortunately, I mean, I completely agree with what you said.
Unfortunately, the struggle I've had lately with the whole Nazi issue is that it's a great,
it's very difficult convincing many people of this because the rhetoric kind of works.
Particularly, I think that someone like Richard Spencer is very good at persuading people. I mean,
this is exactly what his goal is. It's to persuade people that actually what he's saying is quite
reasonable and should at least be taken seriously. So you sort of get trapped into this position
where if you don't take it seriously, it seems like you're the one who hates free speech. You're
the real fascist. Well, Carl Schmitt saw this coming, didn't he? In the early 20th century,
he said liberalism would slide to the right. What's funny about this is that this notion
that liberalism slides to the right or that liberals will side with fascists is something
that I've heard this from leftists for years and have sort of vaguely sort of believed it,
but I didn't really feel it until recently. On YouTube recently, I honestly feel like
you know, Ionesco's play The Rhinoceros. I feel like I'm in The Rhinoceros. There's people turning
into rhinoceroses left and right and to see person after person who spent years calling people
femor-Nazis and black Hitler and then suddenly real ethno-nationalism comes along and they're
like, oh, well, these people are, I don't completely agree with them, but it's not called
them Nazis. They're ethno-nationalists. They believe in a peaceful redistribution of population
and you're just like, oh my God. It suddenly becomes horribly visible to me that if it comes
down to fascism versus anti-fascism, like I see what side these people are on and it's not
anti-fascism and it's a terrifying thing to watch happen. I was in a protest a while ago. I mean,
viewers in the UK might remember there was a bit of a thing going on in Trafalgar Square about a
month or a couple of weeks ago. It all got a bit heated. I was right there in the middle of that.
It was interesting because me and this one other guy who was just on his way at work or something,
he was in a suit and tie, reasonably elderly gent. We were pinned against the shop window
and I was there in my hoodie with my protest sign and he was there in a suit and his
very reasonable looking tie. The police were beating and arresting this Antifa guy in front
of us and the cry went up from the crowd, who defends the Nazis? Police defend the Nazis.
And this guy turned to me and said, it's a horrible thing to say. Why do they say that?
And I was like, look, they are. Like, that is what they're doing. And we had an interesting
discussion, actually me and him, about sort of people putting forward ideas that aren't really
supposed to be true. And so he's like, well, if you don't hear them out, aren't you kind of
censoring their viewpoint? And I was like, no, no, you haven't quite got it. Their viewpoint is not
like putting it forward as an idea to be true. That's them sort of broadcasting a secret message
like a value rather than a fact. So the idea that politics relies on facts,
always relies on facts. That's the dangerous thing because of course,
politics doesn't always rely on facts as well we know.
Yeah. And I think this is the point I have the most difficult persuading people of,
that the usual kind of approach that you would take to a conversation or to a political
discussion is not the right approach when you're dealing with someone like Richard Spencer.
This was basically the whole point of the Roman millennial discussion. And the point that I just
was unable to persuade her of is the idea that you're making a fundamental error of some kind
if you take what's said as an indication of what's, as like a series of factual propositions
about what's true. That's not actually the way this language is functioning.
But of course then the question, yeah, not the way the language is functioning. That's a good
way of putting it. Then the question becomes, and this is a question I got from some of my
commenters when I did my video on white supremacist propaganda, is how do you tell?
How do you tell who's really putting forward the kind of, oh, this is true. I really do believe
in the world of Jewish conspiracy. And who's putting forward the covert message on the news?
How do you tell? Which I suppose, you know, we'd have to do case by case.
Yeah, I keep returning to this idea, because it's a big part of my acting training, of living the
questions, which is something that I floated in a video recently, which commenters didn't really
like very much. Can you say something about that idea?
It's really quite fascinating. So the poet, maybe I can find the quote from Rilke, because
I'll kind of explain why it's important to the acting training. So a lot of actors,
in particular actors in training, face questions like, oh, am I good enough? Or am I too anxious?
Can I do this? Can I do that? And to try and sit down and answer that question and persuade
oneself of like, yes, I'm good enough to be an actor, is futile, because you can be able to maybe
spread yourself intellectually, but you'll still be nervous. So what we've been told is to really
take to heart this thing, this quote from Rilke, the poet, who said, be patient toward all that is
unsolved in your heart, questions like locked rooms and like books that are now written in a
very foreign tongue. Do not now seek the answers which cannot be given you, because you would not
be able to live them. And the point is to live everything. Live the questions now. Perhaps you
will then gradually, without noticing it, live along some distant day into the answer. And the
idea is that not every question can be sort of answered, cut and dry theoretically beforehand.
Some things have to be kind of felt out, which is a really interesting idea, because I came from
like a very academically theoretical background. And when I came across this idea and came across
people who sort of operate like that on the kind of living the questions route, rather than,
as I think out to many people who think about the questions and analyze them first,
that was very interesting to me. And I'm interested a lot at the moment in this
different approach to answering questions, which would seem to go against the kind of debate
theory, yes, let's sit down and talk about it, argue about it. Well, maybe let's just see how we go.
Yeah, that's interesting that you bring that up, because that also turns out to be a very important
point. And a lot of kind of social justice circles and feminism in particular, the idea that
there are some questions that you kind of need to rely on an experience to answer or to fully
comprehend that you can't just kind of like deduce the answer to these questions. And it's something
that—I mean, nothing could illustrate this more ridiculously than a recent incident on YouTube,
where a kind of pretty generic anti-SJW YouTuber named The Satiratician made a response to this
middle school girl teenager who had made this video. She made this video talking about her
experiences being catcalled as a 14, 15-year-old. And his response to this is, do you have any
evidence of being catcalled? How am I supposed to believe that you've been catcalled until
adequate evidence has been presented? And I'm just like, oh my god. Nothing exemplifies the worst of
what is meant by our ironic use of rationals than demanding that a teenage girl provide evidence of
having been catcalled. There's just no nuance in that. It's like, look, some conversations
acquire different standards of evidence. Like if you ask me for directions in the street and I go,
yeah, like, pub's down there. Are you not going to go, well, do you have a map or something?
Go and find out. Or maybe it doesn't matter. Maybe it's enough to just go on.
Is there any evidence that the pub is in that direction?
Testimony is, I guess, a kind of evidence.
It's like the misapplication of a scientific standard of evidence to a situation where that
standard of evidence has no place. Right. It's like, yeah, epistemic injustice is—
Yes. Epistemic injustice. So that's a phrase that's used in philosophy now.
I'm explaining because I don't think this concept is very well known outside of
academic philosophy. But it's the notion that some people's—I guess it's a complicated
notion. I haven't thought about this a while. But one facet of it that I understand
is that some people's testimony is privilege above others, for instance.
Yeah. Well, yeah, I did a video on it a while ago and to sum it up, it's the idea that we can
sometimes do wrongs to people, specifically in their capacities as knowers of things.
So if, for instance, I mean, the example that Fricka uses is from To Kill a Mockingbird,
where the jury doesn't believe Tom Robinson's testimony because he's black, right? But she
says, look, he's trying to give you an item of knowledge there that he is innocent. And the
jury's saying, no, we don't accept that because he's black. She says that's a kind of epistemic
injustice. You're denying his ability to add to the collective pool of human knowledge on
prejudicial grounds. Yeah. And I guess the most very formal and explicit statement of that would
be in traditional Islamic law, I think it's like, what is it, like two women's testimony are needed
or something to match the testimony of one man or something along those lines. But I think
informally, we have the same thing where a teenage girl says that she's being cackled.
And I mean, for the record, anyone over the age of 10 who looks remotely like a woman has been
cackled. And so the idea that this, for something that doesn't, it's not an extraordinary claim. In
other words, it doesn't require much in the way of evidence. And there's a kind of basic trust that
you're supposed to bring to conversations where you believe that what someone says is their
everyday experience. I remember my Christian theology teacher telling me something similar
about the way the Christian communities view the testimony of women as well.
Actually, yeah, it's a topic that's really of interest to, I know, like philosophers of
religion and to theologians in general, because so much of faith relies on testimony and relies
on people's accounts of subjective experiences. And so this turns out to be the revelation.
Yeah, it's a hot topic in philosophy of religion, because it seems like these kind of claims,
of course, for people who are secularists or atheists, we reject that kind of testimony.
At least not as revealing what it claims to reveal.
But of course, religious people need to take it seriously to some extent.
Yeah, I guess so. I remember being very interested. I studied Christian theology for a
year at uni. And alongside philosophy, I remember being very interested in how Revelation was
supposed to work. And back then I was very, I was in a big sort of like rationalist phase.
Yeah, I would stay with it.
Yeah, I think a lot of people do. Which is not, I know my commenters will jump down my throat and
say some people it's not a phase. It's Yes. Okay, fine. For me, it was. Yeah, it was really a lot
of Hitchens and Dawkins and so on. So I remember being very sort of critical in lectures. And
but then I suppose it's a it's a way of, of living the question. And I remember my,
one of my theology lectures, I suppose, I won't name his wife had died of cancer,
sort of 20 years prior to his coming to the uni. And he still, he'd kind of been with her this
whole time. And he's still very much believed in God. And I remember, I remember I didn't ask him
out loud, it would be quite rude. But I remember thinking, like, how do you kind of believe based
on that? And I suppose his answer would, having known him being something like lines, he just
comes does it one day at a time and sort of lives the question, I guess. And yeah, it's interesting.
How did we get on to that? I don't know. But I mean, let's see if I can circle it back around
to the debate thing. So sorry, I keep sort of no, no, no, all sorts of ridiculous. My inclination
is to go where, to go to whatever topic seems interesting. But, but, but so I think that,
so New Atheism, I think presents an interesting case for the argument about debate. Because I
think a lot of, so this is a theory that I'm constantly talking about online. A theory I have
is that current wave of like rationals is like the kind of direct, a lot of these people that
you run into online are in some ways the direct intellectual descendants of New Atheists. So this
was the, I mean, New Atheism was the hottest topic on the internet discussion, in the internet
political discussion world about, you know, nine or 10 years ago. Yeah, then it just seems to
sort of disappear. And then yeah, it disappeared or evolved into the horrible thing it has become.
But I think so, so Christopher Hitchens, for instance, is a man who I have many disagreements
with. But there's no question that he's one of the great debaters of his time. He was really good
he had this, and really good in particular at debating religious people, religious people who
are supposed to be this kind of like paradigm case of people who like, they, why would, you know,
you can't persuade them, like, why would you, why would you have an argument, you can't talk some
out of their faith is the usual idea. But I think a lot of people were persuaded by watching Hitchens
debate. And some of this has to do with his arguments being good, I think, I think certainly,
but also, this big, booming, single barrel voice that he had. And also just the fact that like,
I don't mean in any way to impugn your intellect, but I think that people with English accents in
the United States get a bit of an easy pass. Like, I think you're a very smart person,
but I believe that you could convince half the state of Ohio that you were the intellect of
the century. You know, you're not the first blonde American academic to say that to me.
Yeah. And, and, and like, I think that, you know, I think Milo Yiannopoulos benefits from this
absurd foolishness of Americans. And that's strange. I mean, sometimes when we when we come
to America, we have to play the villains and it's only evil. And sometimes we can just say any old
Ross and people will be like, Hmm, yes, very good. Yeah, I think it's I think it's benefited
Milo Yiannopoulos, for instance. The problem simply is that Americans have not spent enough
time around dumb English people. Yes, yes. I think honestly, a week in London is a cure.
A week in London is a cure. A week in London may be a cure for many things and it's
many others. Yeah, I moved to London from the north nine months ago and I'm still getting used
to it really. It's a terrible place. But so to me, that is this idea, part of the idea
that we have online that debate is the like, ultimate. It's kind of is this, this,
this fetishistic thing that is the arbiter of truth. I think it comes from the effectiveness
of the sort of last movement of sort of intellectuals that were popular on the internet,
the fact that debate was used to create advantage by people like Dawkins and Hitchens.
Yeah, that's a good point. And maybe not just in the sort of argumentative sort of establishing
truth sense, but also in the rhetoric sense, because Hitchens, yeah, he could he could turn
a phrase. And so that's maybe that's interesting that it's that it's maybe come out of that to a
certain extent. Where do you think it'll go then? I don't know, but I think it looks bad.
We talked about like, it seems to be going in this Schmidian direction, right? Like, it seems that
that people alleging themselves to be rationalists have kind of, again, applied
what they think of as rationalism to white nationalist rhetoric in a naive way and have
come to be sort of sympathetic towards it. Whereas, you know, and I think this has to
do with the way that that, so this is the most generic imaginable leftist talking point that
I'm about to repeat, but like the way that state or systemic violence or pressure or coercion
tends to go unseen, whereas any rupture with that tends to look like chaos and violence.
So, I mean, you have things to be violent against the backdrop.
Again, you're mentioning the fact that in a clash with Antifa and the police, like,
nine out of 10 people are going to see horrible Antifa thugs against an agent of law and order.
And I think that the same is true. This is something I, this is something that I sort
of want to explore in a future video. But I think that oftentimes in debate, you know,
if you put a slick white nationalist with a, I don't know, a Jewish person or a black person
or gay person, and the white nationalist sits there talking about peaceful ethnic cleansing,
and like he simply wants a white homeland, just like everyone else is entitled to.
And like, do you go to Japan and insist that they, you know, allow 45 million immigrants?
Do you go to Africa and insist that only white people, that they have to allow all
these white people? No. So why do you insist that we, you know, so they're making these
kinds of like reasonable arguments. And then, if the Jewish person, the black person,
the socialist, whoever is the other interlocutor kind of freaks out or calls them a Nazi,
the rationals or the liberals will see this, and they'll see like a reasonable person trying
to make a point and this unfair person calling them a Nazi.
If people only have like four minutes to make their points, the person on the other side
doesn't have like time to sit down and go, look, here's like the history of the world.
Yeah. And it's the blindness to the violence and the inherent in the idea of white nationalists,
or the idea in which this is sort of fundamentally incompatible with meeting, two people meeting in
an honest discussion. The idea that this person wants to purge all people like that from society.
That's an idea that you can't really meet in a back and forth discussion on even footing.
It's not something that can really be up for debate.
It's a good question of values, really. Yeah, and very fundamental values. I mean,
if you think that the meaning of society is not, you know, that humanity is not what unites us in
society and we're not coming to meet each other on terms of humanity, but rather it's race,
then you've excluded all people who don't belong to the race from even the discussion,
from even participation in the society. And so that's it. The game is up for having discussion
between those people. And it's not because the person called them a Nazi or because they got
emotional. It's because the race or ethno-nationalist's ideas fundamentally
involve the exclusion of that person from politics.
Well then, all right. I like the way I just put that better than I ever
said it on the roaming millennial thing. I wish I'd copy that.
I guess to put it on its head then, because I can anticipate what some of my commenters might say.
Your great video, the debate between the hard land left and the bougie liberal,
was if we go into it thinking that there definitely has to be violence,
then it's a foregone conclusion. I suppose if we start saying things like,
this is going to sound really bad, but if we start saying things like there are certain people that
we can't debate with, again, I guess the question becomes is how do we know which ones they are?
I think that's the question that a lot of my commenters will ask. I think my answer to that
might be that, well, that forces us to engage with the idea that actually probably at a bottom
level all politics involves violence of some kinds, so it probably forces us to engage with,
okay, who are the targets of our violence and why? It forces us to see the end of our
own ideological noses, I suppose, whereas normally we don't look at them.
Yeah, because there's a sense that any kind of politics that we have will be
exclusionary in some way. That doesn't mean they're all equal.
But it has to do with who you're excluding. The norms of a liberal society or a society based on
free speech, free values, based on separation of church and state, based on all these things,
this involves exclusion. So, for instance, in the US the separation clause is supposed to exclude
religion from politics in such a way that anyone who wants to make an argument about policy based
on their religious convictions, that's excluded. That's off the table. I'm making this as a John
Rawls point. You're not in the realm of public reason anymore, I guess, if you want to argue
from religious faith. It's interesting because we don't have that in the UK.
I guess it's a specifically American idea. If that's only in this election that's going
on at the moment, the leader of the liberal Democrats, Tim Farron, was getting brought
up on the idea that he was saying gay sex is a sin and so on, and that gay people, he said on
Twitter once, that gay people could be cured and so on. He was saying that based on religious
arguments. Yeah, we don't have separation of church and state here. In fact, the head of
state is also the head of the church. Yes, so I guess I should also clarify that, of course,
in practice in American politics, there's religious appeals constantly.
Yeah, explicit and coded ones, I understand it.
Yeah, explicit ones. The philosophical idea, the John Rawls idea anyway, is that
that's sort of not allowed in some moral or philosophical sense that you can't expect
because it excludes anyone who doesn't share your faith. You're not making an appeal to the
base of precepts that are supposed to be the things that we all agree on.
I suppose it's an argument, interestingly, it's an argument based on a kind of personal revelation,
I guess. It's an argument based on a kind of personal experience. But then we ourselves
were saying only a few minutes ago that sometimes that some people base things on experience and
that is very useful. So I guess what I would say what the difference is between listening to a
feminist based on their personal experience and appearing at the appeal of a theist on the basis
of a revelation has to do with the fact that I think a feminist can reasonably expect other
people to give some credence to their personal experience. Whereas I think that a religious
person sort of can't really expect people who aren't part of that faith to accept this as a
valid reason. Yeah, and I guess also it's to do with the sort of ordinariness and commonality of
experience. If somebody makes a video about how they've been cackled, then half of the world's
population might be like, yeah, that's a thing that can reasonably happen. Whereas if somebody
makes a video about having seen a divine vision in the sky, it's like, well, this is slightly more
rare. Yeah, or at least the divine vision claim. Again, it depends on what kind of society you're
living in. I'm sure in medieval Christendom, arguments were surely made all the time on the
basis of divine revelation. Demons were driven from a pig today. This was considered a valid
form of evidence, but because of the sort of philosophical underpinnings of our public reason
and our discourse, our society, we don't accept that kind of stuff as valid reasoning. It's not
universal enough. Only people who are in this specific faith will accept it. So it's sort of
excluded from the discourse of democracy because it's simply too specific to a certain group of
people. I suppose that might be why it's... So I guess one thing that follows from this,
maybe as concerns a debate topic, is that if you're going to have public discussions,
if you're going to have public debates, there's sort of rules that regulate what's allowed in
debate. And one of those rules is that you have to sort of appeal to shared precepts in some ways,
otherwise there's nothing productive that can happen. If you appeal to a basic value that
someone doesn't share, that argument has no sway. Yeah, but also it's interesting sometimes that
important matters can rest on facts that aren't always shared very equally. So I mean,
maybe going back to that white nationalist versus someone on the left hypothetical thing we're
talking about, the kind of white nationalist is banking on the fact that, and maybe
reliant themselves on the fact that people generally are ignorant of a lot of
facts of history because they just simply aren't taught. Like, I remember once I went on a walking
tour of an Irish city, and we were taught all about the history of Ireland on this walking tour,
and me and my English friends were like, what? We were just never taught this. It's just not taught
in British schools, the extent of the horrors that we did in Ireland. And therefore,
certain very important things don't come up in public political debates because of that. So for
instance, when we had the Brexit referendum, people were saying, oh, yeah, we're going to
close the borders with the EU. And it was not really, I saw very publicly acknowledged that
to close the border with the EU would involve building a militarized border across the middle
of Ireland, which of course, you can walk down the road being the EU in part to Ireland. And
nobody kind of said, hang on a minute, haven't we built enough militarized checkpoints across
Ireland? And so that kind of, that lacuna ends up really affecting the debates that are even allowed
to occur, never mind that progress in certain directions. Yeah, so I think I guess I'm saying
something, I'm trying to say something different, because I think that when you are not appealing,
if there is factual information that you want to rely on, that's not widely known, you can always
bring up these facts. Because, so, you know, it was Dublin, not Ireland before I get.
Yeah. So for the, you know, an American equivalent of this would be, for instance,
like people now, Americans are so bewildered as to like, why do North Koreans like hate us so much?
Like, they're just crazy. But like, for some reason, they just hate America. And like,
everyone forgets, like, no one really seems to have any consciousness of the fact that like,
we went to war with them and just bombed the hell out of them. And like, hundreds of thousands or
maybe millions of people died. And like, Americans just have never been bombed. We just have no
conception of what that feels like. So we just assume, like, I don't know, Koreans are just
crazy. Like, they, for some reason, they hate us. I don't know why. Like, why is that? But like,
There are people in the UK, I mean, people in the UK say this about Islamic terrorism as well.
They're like, oh, why? They just got so angry. And we have MPs who are like, oh,
Islam is it? MPs at the MP level of the Conservative Party are like, or former MPs,
people like people like Lord Tebbit are like, oh, Islam is incompatible with British values.
And it's like, do you think it might have something to do with the Iraq war?
You know, when we interviewed captured ISIS soldiers, and they're like, yeah,
I'm doing this because of the Iraq war. Everyone's like, no, no, no, no, no, no,
it's because the values and freedom, they hate our freedoms. It's like,
revenge, revenge, renowned retaliation, you know, the three Rs. It's like, no, no, no, no, no.
Well, it's very easy to forget a war when it was not waged in your country. And when your
people weren't drafted, and when, you know, so a lot of people made money off it as well.
So like, I think a lot of Americans are too, with the Iraq war, we're just like,
why is like, who still cares about that? Like, that was a long time ago.
They're still dead.
Just come back and respawn. Yeah, we're not, I can't speak for British curriculum as a whole,
but I wasn't really taught about slavery in Britain either. Not our history of slavery.
It was kind of, we had sort of 1066, Henry VIII, a little bit of Tudors, Elizabeth I,
World War One. It's like, sorry, what happened in between that? What? Oh, what? Nothing happened
then. We invaded the world and stole all their money. It's like, ah, there's that weird gap.
And for the same reason, we don't do the French Revolution, because that was all happening at the
same time. But I suppose with these kinds of things, you can at least bring them up,
like you can bring up the factual thing. So that's maybe not like, it's not an absolute
obstacle to discourse with someone because you can always bring this stuff up. I think where we have
a more difficult problem is when there's a kind of fundamental value that you don't share with
a person you're discussing. So I think one reason I find it difficult or impossible to have a real
conversation with a Nazi, for example, is that I share as a kind of basic presupposition of my
politics that human beings from different groups have equal moral worth as humans.
I guess I shouldn't say that because actually I know that they're getting smarter about this.
They say, well, we're not white supremacists. We don't think we're more important. We just
think that we deserve to have our own thing. So okay, fine. We'll pretend that we actually
believe they think that and go with their new thing, which is they think that society
should only include people from their race or from the race. And if I don't think that,
which I don't, there's almost nothing, like what can we say to each other to convince each other
that- There's a lot of point talking about the hows and the whys and the wherefores and the
economic this or that. Right. So we can sit around. What's going to happen if I debate
Richard Spencer? Suppose I actually am trying to have a conversation with him,
which I don't think I would ever try to do because I think that's a waste of time.
But let's try to imagine how it would go if I did do that. How am I going to persuade him?
We could start by talking about, I'm going to say, well, your plan to be peaceful and ethnic cleansing
will surely result in violence or something like that. But come on, the fundamental disagreement
is 25 steps before we get to that. But then you've granted him the idea that there's a peaceful,
there's even such a thing as peaceful- And I've granted him the idea that
peaceful ethnic cleansing would be something that would be okay to do even if we could do it.
And even you've granted him the idea that that's what he wants, what he really wants.
Yeah. So really the argument should start way before that, which is the idea that
so I mean, and they want to state it as an empirical question, right? Like, oh,
it's just a fact that diverse societies don't work or something. And they'll have evidence
that's supposed to show that. So I guess you sort of can try to use facts to argue values,
but often the facts are sort of off the main point. They don't think that they want an
ethno-state because diverse societies can't work. That's not really the chain of reasoning.
Yeah. I'm willing to put down a five.
Yeah. It comes down to the fact that they don't want to share their country with people not like
them in certain respects, right? And so they'll do what it takes. Every reason that goes to support
that is ultimately kind of post hoc rationalization. That's the right post hoc, that was it.
Yeah. And of course you can't prove the psychology of this, of course.
No. But again, it's raining. It's good it's raining morning. It's like, what?
Yeah. It becomes revealed to you in discussions. No matter how many times you argue that actually
unbalanced New York City functions fairly well, despite the fact that it has so much
ethnic diversity, they won't hear that. The subject, the conversation has changed.
It goes to crime. And then there's a wearing down as well. Nobody has the resource to fill
all these lacunas in history and facts and so on and to go through all the sources like someone
like Sean and Jen does and to go through every single marker on that map of crimes.
They did a great video a while ago where there was like a map of crimes committed by migrants
in Germany. And they went through every single one of them and was like, this is listed as arson.
There's a guy burning his toast. This is a different time. And they went through every
single one, but not everyone has the time to do that. Yes. And it's exhausting and difficult and
grueling to go through and debunk everything. And it's ultimately kind of pointless.
And it has absolutely no effect on the people who believe that.
Yeah. How do you see debate being sort of fetishized on YouTube? Because I see,
I get a lot of comments who are like, oh, you wouldn't reply to my comment. Why don't you
debate me? I'm like, yeah, that's not a debate. That's just a chat, you know?
Well, a lot of these demands that we get to debate are simply like people who,
you know, because I've often had people respond to my comment, respond to my comment, respond to
them. And if what I say is effective enough, they didn't delete all the comments. So it's bait. It's
what it is. It's bait to get you to engage. But I have had some very increasingly rare now.
But some of my favorite moments on YouTube is when I get comments of people who are like,
really angry. Like, oh, why did you say this? Like, fuck you. And then I go, that's interesting.
Tell me more about this. And then some of my favorite moments are when they then come back
and they go, I was angry when I said that. I'm sorry. I don't agree with you, but I see where
you're coming from. So I really like those engagements. But you're right. I mean, all
too often people just, they just want validation, not attention. But there's something like
that that they're after. Is it an attachment to our time?
Yes. Yeah. Oh, well, online is right. I got emails from like, just like egg accounts on
Twitter being like, debate me on my podcast. Like, will you come debate me on my podcast?
I'm like, what podcast? Who are you? Like, do you? Why? Like, why? Why would I do that?
You know what I mean? Like, it's weird entitlements demand that you
It's slightly, slightly cruel. But sometimes when when I get that, I just I just quote them
my sort of hourly tuition rates.
Yes. Also, I want to be cautious not to get too I mean, we get worn down and on the idea
of engagement and become very cynical about it, I think. But I want to be careful not to get too
down on the idea of engagement too. Because as you said, like you do have these interactions
where someone later comes to you and says like, Oh, I was angry when I said that. And it seems
that they actually have thought about what you said. They actually have thought about what they
said in the sort of like, this kind of reconsidering has happened. So I definitely
have moments like that. And although I think overwhelmingly, the response that I get to doing
debates or conversations is just utter uselessness. You know, like, I'm like, put, you know,
the, you know, look at look at the comments on, you know, my debates with Blair roaming millennial
and you it's a lot of like, why should I take this disgusting training seriously? It's a lot of,
you know, just this guy. It's like, wow, I'm really this is really productive here, isn't it?
But then you also get I also get an often in private for some reason, the nicer things are
said in private, ugly things are said in public. I don't know why this is, but it often is the case.
But I'll have private messages from people who say that actually, like,
they find the whole thing to be incredibly eye opening and like revelatory and like,
and so it's like, okay, well, if some people if some people are getting something like,
Hmm, and I suppose if the idea is that everyone should have their say, and that's coming from
a place of compassion, then that's good. Like long may we all nurture those compassionate
impulses, even if Yeah, even if it is the case that Nazis will try and take advantage of them.
Yeah, that's not it's not all become too worn down and cynical.
So I guess, yeah, I guess there can be there's really can be a positive effect of debate. I
think it's just a matter of being of choosing who you debate with intelligently. So I
Which is a question that, you know, that's, that's not exactly ready. That's a living the
questions kind of thing. Yes. And so how do you choose? I mean, so I feel like I'm already getting
smarter about this. I would never debate Blair White again. Because I think that she's, she
doesn't care about what I say, and she doesn't care about what's true. I think that too much
of what her focus on is, like I said, I mean, she's a bully, she recently tweeted,
I never claimed not to be a bully. So I take it that she won't object to my calling her
bullies. She's she's never claimed not to be one allegedly, we now hear but so okay,
she's a self professed self without bully. So why bother with that? Like, why? Why go subject
yourself to that. But I don't regret the discussion with roaming millennial, even though I think a lot
of her audience is horrible. I think that she conducts a discussion in a way where something
sort of I mean, even if there's not any movement from the two people involved, it's possible to
have a conversation with roaming millennial in a way that people in the audience learn something.
And that I think is valuable. That's cool. That's very cool. So it's a matter of Yeah,
it's a matter of like getting a feel for who's worth engaging and who isn't. Yeah, yeah.
Looking at questions. Absolutely. And that's what I was gonna say was there.
And yeah, I can't remember. Maybe they'll come back to me. Yeah.
Let's see. Um, so
I feel like we we wanted to say enough about the fetishization of debate. I feel like we
keep touching on this, but without
Well, I can't I can't speak for you. But I get a lot of commenters who are like,
yeah, use the word debate when it seems like well, that's not a debate. It's a chat.
Or you know what, it's not a debate. So is there a discussion? What's the
distinction, I guess, between a debate and a discussion?
Oh, well, to my mind debate conjures up because I guess the experience of formal debating conjures
up images of sort of time limits and opportunities for people to sort of have rebuttals and speeches
from the fore. And it conjures up that image of suits and gowns really, whereas discussion
just sounds like more like this, I guess. And yeah, more fun.
Informality, a willingness to not so I think in a debate, I guess I would think you kind of
your people who have opposed positions, one of you is committed to one side, one of you is
committed to the other side. And your job in a debate is to represent the case as good as
possible. Yeah.
You say, oh, yeah, that's a good point. Like, yeah, maybe you're right. That you've lost like
that's bad. Whereas in a discussion, that's great. Because that means it's like, yeah,
now we share some common ground. You know, let's have another one.
Yes. So I think right in discussion, the attempt is much more to kind of reach some mutual
understanding. I guess I think mutual fun. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I think I think that people are often
so as regards what the goal of the discussion is, I mean, I think only in the best case scenario is
any kind of mutual understanding reached that doesn't often happen, especially when you're
dealing with people who are ideologically very distant. But I do think that what sometimes
happens more often than someone being persuaded in the course of a discussion is I know this is
the case with me rarely in my mid discussion, am I going to change my view about something,
but often I'll kind of a day or two later, thinking back on it, or like looking into
something the other person said, think like, you know what, I am not exactly correct about that.
Yeah, yeah. And so maybe that guy I spoke to at that protest, who turned his nose up so much,
maybe he's now a month later, maybe he's a committed communist.
I think that, yeah, I think that's such an important thought to have. Not necessarily
he's a committed communist, but that some of the sense of futility that you have from
these discussions, it feels more futile than it is, I think, because maybe that someone
ends the debate by saying like, fuck you, Emily, that's the end of the discussion,
and they go off in a huff, or you go off in a huff. But later, you may not hear about it,
but it may kind of get into them and they might sort of refine their position.
Like locker rooms or books that are written in a foreign tongue, absolutely.
Yeah, exactly.
Live some distant days there and say, yeah, see, the more I experience, the more I think
there's wisdom in real life. Oh, that was what I was going to say earlier on. Do you see this kind
of, you said that you were kind of learning more better who to engage with and who not to. I
remember learning that relatively early on when I did my video on gender. There was a YouTuber who
will remain nameless, who made a reply video. I think you know who it is. They made a reply video
to my video on gender. And it was hilarious because they quite clearly hadn't watched the
whole thing because they started bringing up arguments saying, what about this? What about
this? That I myself had mentioned in the video after the six minute mark. And they even, they
did it as a collaboration with someone else. And they clearly hadn't watched the whole thing.
And they invented, they made all these points. And then I wrote underneath, I was like, but I
said that, like, you can't say that I missed this out when I explicitly said it. And then they were
like, inventing, like, what if a trans person heard what you were saying about gender? Like,
you don't need to invent a hypothetical trans person. I cited two in the video, like,
go read this stuff. Like, I think it's a trans person would critique Judith Butler on this. And
I'm like, I know, I said that, like, so after that, I don't, and to all those people out there
who I know some are planning to make reply videos to my work, and I know some of them make them
anyway. I don't really watch them anymore because I don't really find them that useful. Of all the
reply videos I've ever watched, about 20 seconds of one of them I found useful. And the guys,
I still don't agree with the guy. But that was kind of useful because I hadn't considered it.
But the rest, I'm like, I just, I'm not going to watch it because maybe I'm missing out a huge
amount. Perhaps my commenters will be able to find ones that are brilliant. But I don't find
them all that useful on YouTube, particularly on YouTube. And yeah, listen to commenters and so on.
But on YouTube, I think there's a lot of the performative aspects. They're kind of like,
oh, the pwnage in there. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And so, yeah, I agree that there's certain people who's
like, responses to me, I'll watch it two times the speed to see the first three minutes and be like,
okay, this is good. Yeah. Yeah. But I, yeah, so I think that, you know, you try to stay open,
but also if something is, I agree, it's a widespread problem of people just like,
grossly misunderstanding things that you say, ludicrous straw manning of your arguments, or
again, just giving evidence that they haven't even watched your video. All these are problems.
And then also, just the, this is, yeah, you mentioned the video about like, you know,
skeptic destroyed your butthole, or whatever the comment that I was getting on these kinds of
comments. And so I kind of, yeah, I kind of want to go back to that, that idea of that video where
I talked about like, what I think the point of having a response video is, is it to destroy your
opponent? Or is it to try? So I think there's people who it's worth responding to. And that's
part of what I mean when I talk about choosing debates, is that because a guy like armored
skeptic, I disagree with him a lot. But in interacting with him, I get the sense that he's
sincere, that he thinks what he says, and that he's somewhat open to like, reconsidering things.
So I think that's a person who's worth talking to. And I also think that in order to make the
conversation worthwhile, both people have to come to the conversation with the understanding that
the goal is a discussion where you're both somewhat curious to get a handle on what that
person says. Yeah, curiosity. And you're not decided from the beginning, time to wreck someone
like, yeah, like, one of the phrases that we are taught in the end drama school is full of wisdom.
One of the things we're taught is curiosity, not ambition. Yes, great phrase, which is a,
that's a lovely phrase that Yeah, yeah. So and there's ways that YouTubers can I mean,
so this is my suggestion to YouTubers who want to make response videos is there's ways to do
response that don't involve pwnage. So if you want to make it entertaining, and I do this, like,
think of it in different terms. So I've used like, framing devices for response videos,
like inviting the person to dinner, or, or like seducing them, which I think, like, sort of help
a little bit to subvert the idea that it's pwnage. Yeah, I see the rabbit mask in the background. I
remember that. Yeah. And so so, again, I think if people would look at these alternatives to
the wrecking way, there's a way of having these discussions that could go so much better than
they tend to go. Hmm. Yeah, because it could be fun. Well, again, yeah, pints, just go for pints.
Yes. But I see people like Blair, like, you know, she'll have she'll she'll say, like,
oh, let's just have those people discussion in order to snag someone like me or Laci Green to
get on the debate. But then she goes back to her videos where, like, is there really there's no
actual like, there's no I've watched so many Blair White videos. I'm I'm so sorry for myself. I but
she she she does these like thing. I mean, is there ever a moment when she makes a video response
to Milo Stewart or to Riley Dennis, where there's ever an attempt at a genuine like human connection
or a genuine discussion in any way with the person she's talking to? Like there just never is.
I remember hearing about Milo Stewart through your video on them. Actually,
do people still people still bully them? Um, yeah, it's not as bad as it used to be. But
yeah, they tend to stay away from a lot of that. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, there's channels.
Not where you're not losing anything. You're not missing out. Yeah. If you're avoiding these
bullying channels. Yeah. Just for you and PBS ID channel and a few others. Sean and
Jennifer cooking. Yes. Yeah, I mean, there's a lot of channels not worth watching. I mean,
bearing my god, like this. I don't know if you know who this guy is. He's unfortunately,
he's it's a kind of like bullying shitty response channel. Huge, like 300,000 subscribers.
But he, I mean, so he did a response to my debate with Roman millennial where he what he did was
show clips of me and he deleted every single thing I said, except every time I say the word I think
and to me, and then he calls me a cunt and then you know, so okay, wow, like, and so you know,
my advice to all feminists and social justice YouTubers in terms of dealing with bearing
is do not interact with him except as an actual brown bear, because this is the level that you're
dealing with. Like there's no point in engaging this. Like this is a bear in the woods to say,
you leave a comment saying hi bearing your big brown bear and then leave don't watch the video
because there's no point like that. If someone's if, like I said, discussion is a two way road.
And if one person is not making good faith effort to discuss, don't you don't you there's no reason
for you to open yourself up. That's a waste of your time. Yeah, yeah. That's a shame that people
do that. Yeah, it's well YouTube is. I guess it's it's rewarded. YouTube is a shame. Yes,
I think yes, that slogan actually, it's not a corporate slogan. YouTube a shameful place.
Yeah, I think that's the last time I went to YouTube Space London and that was on the side
of the building. Yeah. A shameful place. I quite like that on a t shirt. Yeah, but I guess I don't
know. Like I say, I think there really are a lot of people on YouTube worth engaging. So it's not
a matter of me being against debate. I'm not against debate. I'm not against engagement.
I simply think and this is what this is the advice people gave me. And I didn't listen to it. I had
to learn it. I'm still learning it. But I have to I just I'm just someone like, I'm not a smart
person in the sense that I just believe people when they tell me things like I have to make all
every mistake myself like to play. I just I guess maybe it's a kind of I'm so such a rational
skeptic. I don't believe personal testimony. Every single mistake I must make on my own in order to
believe anyone about anything. So again, I had to I have to see for myself the liberals turn fascist.
I had to see for myself who isn't who is and isn't worth engaging in. And yeah, I'm still in
the process of it. So like I said, I'll probably do more debates that are mistakes. And that's just
part of making those mistakes. It's just part of my learning how to do this. I think sometimes
with debates, there's a little bit of um, there's a little bit of a kick who goes madman about it.
And I think I remember thinking this, I remember we really, really interested when I discovered
this story. So for those who may be watching who don't know, there's this fantastic story about
a lunatic who escapes from from an asylum. And he realizes that if he goes into town and just says
mad shit, then they're going to realize he's mad and they're going to send him back. So he's like,
ah, right. I will only say things that are uncontroversially true. And then nobody could
nobody's gonna lock me up for that. Like so he says, right. All I'm ever gonna say to anybody
is the world is round. So he goes into town and to every single person he meets like the world is
round, the world is round, the world is round, the world is round. That's all he says. And he's
right. Because it is. And they like pretty much immediately realizes realize that he's a madman
and they lock him up. And Kierkegaard told this story. And the point was, you can have all the
facts and all the truths and so on. And you can be like, technically true and correct, but still
wrong. If you've got the context wrong of why it matters. Walking around pubs saying the world is
round, everyone's gonna be like, what's wrong with you? Because yeah, you're right. But why?
Like, what are you saying? What's the act that's being performed here?
This is one of the things that you get out of studying philosophy, I think that like,
I miss them. So in a lot of ways, I hate interacting with other philosophy people,
not you, you're awesome. But like, a lot of academic philosophy people who are like,
especially like people who are like in the PhD route, you know, they get so involved in the
language of philosophy that they sort of lose the ability to communicate with a normal person,
because they've got this, this whole little technical way of doing it, which has some
advantages. But then when I go outside, and I talk to people with normal people, God, I suddenly wish
they knew philosophy of language. Because now, now there's this like, lack of distinction between,
you know, no one, I think very few people have this idea that just saying a fact is not enough,
like a fact is always presented as part of a bigger chain of reasons, or there's different
ways of stating facts. And right, you can state the fact the world is round. And if it's out of
context, it could be wrong, or it could be crazy. Right? Like, like, like, two and two makes what
the world is round. It's Yeah, wrong, wrong answer, like correct, but wrong. Or like,
in my video on on white supremacist propaganda, like, I was so pleased when I thought of this
example, and example, I love you, which which can be said, like 100 million different ways and
always be true and always mean the same thing, but do something so different to the person
hearing it every time. And, or another thing, another thing you get me with maybe the white
nationalist thing is you'll have people point out, like, here's a list of all the Jews involved in
the media and all the Jews involved in politics. And it's like, okay, yes, all those people are of
Jewish ancestry, and all of them are what you say. But like, so it's not that it's not a factual
dispute. It's the way it's what they're saying with it. Like how, of course, when you when you
point that out, they go, but I'm just listing the facts. Like, you're the one who's thinking that
just because I made a list of all the people who live in the neighborhood of this ancestry,
you're the real racists. Yes, it's well done. We can all do the Russian reversal.
And oftentimes, when you try to make these kinds of arguments, and this is again, the danger of
doing this on a public platform is I end up seeming like some kind of like, it's like the
sophistry of some fancy talking elitist by like, trying to like add this additional light, you know
what I mean? It seems like I seem like a weasel, or something for trying to get out and take
people's words and know what I'm going to do. But now that there's the tip of the iceberg,
and then there's everything else, like,
so again, you can imagine you can imagine having like a very an argument, a very belligerent
creationist, and the creationist wins the argument, because they, if you allow them
to lock you down with, so like, here's how this might go. Like, they'll say, like, can or cannot
a monkey give birth to a man? And you say, well, no, but and they say, aha. And like, you know,
but actually, these things are a gradual process over time, talking over time,
and like small genetic mutations. It's only over the course of millions of years. And he's like,
this fancy talking liberal thinks you should believe. He won't give a straightforward
answer to the question. And like, so there's ways of arguing that make sophistication seem
like deception. Yeah, yeah. That makes sort of crude fallacies seem like common sense.
Yeah, I suppose. There's something interesting in there about, just a half-form thought,
something interesting in there about education, and academia in particular being kind of gated
off to particular class interests. Traditionally, maybe there's something interesting in there,
but maybe that's another topic for another time. I'm happy to crack on with this and continue.
Can we have a tea break? Can I make tea? Will that be terribly boring for everyone?
Or are we, or is there anything more?
Sorry, do you want to say you want to continue the stream but make tea or do you want to
just call it? I had this time with me. I mean, yeah, I'm happy to keep talking.
All right, sure. I'll just talk to the chat while you do that.
It's either this or, you know, write an essay on Brecht, but I'll be pottering around in
the background making tea. All right, sounds good. Tea break.
It's the law, I'm afraid, in England. I can't go 90 minutes without tea.
Yeah, he has no choice. It's the law of England. All right, I'm gonna look at the chat.
How's everyone doing?
While he's doing well, you know what, while he's making tea, I'm gonna do a shot because
this is America.
Shots! Oh, God, I'm almost out of booze. That's gonna be a problem because I'm supposed to go
talk to Destiny later about transracialism. I'm noticing all of you. All right, let's see.
Evan Williams. A good American whiskey. It's actually a bad American whiskey,
but it's drinkable. It'll do. It'll do its work.
It'll be like three in the afternoon for you.
Yeah, it's three. It's almost four in the afternoon, but it's Sunday.
Well, it's nighttime here, so.
All right, well, I'm trying to think of a good toast. Someone proposed toast.
I was thinking of doing an ironic hail victory, but I think I should not do that.
An ironic Richard Spencer hail victory.
Oh, dear.
If I want people to take my... Let's not do that. You know what? Nazis are literally
ruining me. I find myself... Their thoughts just infect my head. They're terrible, ironic
Nazism. It affects me. Not that I believe any of it, but it's just there. It's there in my head.
I'm there trying to make breakfast or try taking a shower. I just find myself thinking about cucks
and thinking about cucking. It's just like, God damn it. I didn't used to think about this.
The alt-right has done this to me. They've put...
Yeah, and I find even in acting there's not a lot of escape because the three
plays that might end up being our showcase at the end of the year are all about Nazis and fascists.
Well, down with fascists.
Yeah, yes, down with fascists. Absolutely.
I say that without any irony whatsoever.
My man, I've not had whiskey in ages. I've not had whiskey since I lived in Scotland, actually.
Well, it's a good place for it.
Yeah, absolutely.
Evan Williams is not the smoothest of all whiskeys, I must say.
Are you a single malt or a blended person?
I'm a blended person for purely financial reasons.
Next time I do a Let's Play livestream, I think I'm going to start a whiskey fund
to raise some money for some decent whiskey.
Fair enough.
I think I'm relying on people who like whiskey to be evangelists.
Enough about good whiskey that they'll pay me to drink it.
This is one of the great things about whiskey people is that they're not satisfied with being
a whiskey person by themselves. They want everyone else to join them.
And so you can exploit this urge as a means of getting free whiskey.
Yeah, my friend John, the liquid guy on Twitter is a good whiskey drinker, I think.
Now I'm all teed up.
How is the chat? How is everyone?
They're doing just fine.
There's not a whole lot of Nazis here.
I must say, despite the common claim made by YouTube rationals that everyone has Nazis
in their chat, I'm not seeing a whole lot of it in my chat.
I wonder what it is that I do to keep the Nazis away.
Maybe it's not constantly sympathized with them.
Is it Ollie or Ollie, says workers of O-L-L-Y, if you prefer.
That'd be nice.
I remember I used to go by Oliver, which is my real name, but my first ever girlfriend
told me that Ollie with a Y was cuter, and I've been Ollie ever since.
Although my professional name is Oliver on acting credits, so I don't mind really.
Oh yeah, Le Pen lost.
I really should have been toasting to pen losing.
Well, I guess I did.
Down with fascists, yeah.
Down with fascists.
Down with fascists.
Oh, that's relaxing, isn't it?
What, whiskey?
Oh no, Le Pen losing.
I mean, also whiskey, but...
Oh yeah, I guess, yeah.
I really don't know much about Macron, so...
Yeah, he's not like a super great politician, but like my bar has sunk very low.
Yeah, it could be worse.
It could be worse, I guess, yeah.
My French friend will be relieved, I'm sure, who makes fun of my terrible French.
I spoke French in a video a while ago, and a few of my commenters were like,
oh, that's really great.
And then my French friend was like,
you sound like an English soldier trying to chat up a French country maid.
It's like, wow, how very specific.
Yeah, that's an interesting thing for your mind to go to first.
People are super chatting me to do another shot.
I will do, because you did that, I will do one more shot before the chat is over,
but I'm going to keep my composure.
Oh man, I wish I could have some.
That'd be great.
Well, that technology is not yet upon us, but someday.
Someday.
I'll stick with the tea.
I don't even have any booze in my whole flat.
Wow.
That's all right.
I woke up with a stinking thing over this morning, so I can do.
I had to go to a sword fighting lesson today,
which is the kind of thing you've got to do when you're an actor.
It's like, oh, please slip and kill me.
Can you please upload sword fighting videos?
Oh, oh, maybe.
They'd be very dull, it's all very slow motion, yeah.
Oh, I don't know.
There's a lot of great European martial arts and
European historical sword fighting channels on YouTube.
Now, this is another topic that many of these channels
also have just the slightest tinge of neo-fascism about them.
Yeah, who was the guy you used to make videos about who kind of played Skyrim?
The Golden One.
Yeah.
What was that about?
Oh, Tom to the glory of Evan Williams, yes.
Yeah, The Golden One.
So he's a fascinating character.
He's a Swedish bodybuilder who kind of does this larping Skyrim thing,
where he uploads himself playing Skyrim with his commentary,
and his commentary is gold.
I mean, of all the fascists, The Golden One is my favorite.
I mean, he's actually entertaining.
I never thought I'd say this, but it makes me feel weird inside,
because I'm like, this man believes things that I think are monstrous,
and yet I'm having a great time watching his YouTube videos.
I feel like it makes me feel so conflicted and weird.
But he's also given me the idea to play my own cock version of Skyrim.
I guess it's a kind of penitence for enjoying his fascist videos.
Skyrim, that's great.
I love that idea.
Oh, what's that?
You've got one video.
I'm glad, I'm glad, I'm glad.
Hmm.
I remember right back when I started,
I did a Let's Play series of a philosophy game called Socrates Jones,
which was quite fun.
Oh my gosh.
I haven't done any Let's Plays since.
It seems like everyone does them, so.
Yeah.
I'm an absolute noob when it comes to Let's Plays,
but I'm streaming Pokemon on my live stream channel.
I made a separate channel, by the way, guys,
if you want to check it out for live streams.
This is on my main channel, of course,
because I think this is a stream,
which until recently had some serious intellectual merit.
But I think that my live stream channel,
I want to, I just want a channel that I can just post whatever frivolous,
horrible nonsense that comes to my head.
And so without offending my usual subscribers,
so that's the point of that.
Yeah, I should do that as well.
I think this is somewhere I might start a second channel for my acting.
It's a lot of fun.
Yeah.
I think when a YouTuber builds up a certain fan,
you know, a fan base of a certain size,
you sort of feel this like intense pressure before you upload anything,
because you're like, oh, I don't want to disappoint people.
This has to be up to my standards of quality.
And so it's a great liberation to just make a new channel and be like,
oh, I can do whatever I want.
Yeah, I don't experience that.
But then I'm quite shit, so.
Well, I don't think you're that shit.
I think your videos are actually pretty well produced and thought out.
And I think you have more subscribers than I do.
I mean, I think that.
Not for long.
Well, I don't know.
We'll see.
But yeah, it's psychologically good for me to have a channel where I'm like,
I don't care if I don't care what happened from this channel.
Yeah.
Yeah, I kind of have to fit it around drama school,
which is like half five in the morning till sort of six at night every day.
So this is like the school is like a full time thing for you now.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
I graduate in September and then I'll be I'll be an actor living in London.
Wow.
Living the dream.
Amazing thing.
That's why I'm kind of learning to swing swords and
ride horses and all the rest of it, because which is a lot of investment and time.
But my casting is Shakespeare and period dramas.
And doing that on TV would be great.
But if I can't swing a sword and ride a horse,
then all I'm going to be doing is opening the door to the character and saying that.
And that'll be my only role.
Whereas if I can ride the horse and swing the sword,
then I can be Henry the fifth, you know?
Yes.
Well, I think you'd be great.
Oh, thank you.
It's not just the beard.
Thank you very much.
So you're interested in TV or stage or both?
Anything.
I'll do any of it because I love it all so much.
Yeah, I've acted since I was very little and I would do anything they would let me do.
Yeah.
What about you?
You're YouTube full time now, aren't you?
Yeah, this is this is it.
This is all I'm doing is YouTube every day, all day.
That's funny.
It's amazing.
I love it.
I wouldn't trade it for anything else.
It's a lot of Nazis though.
But it's a lot of Nazis, granted.
More Nazis than most jobs.
I mean, I'm working at least I'm working harder than I was when I was a PhD student.
But I'm more happy than I was.
That's great.
So I mean, what I would say to people who want to be full time YouTubers is
get ready to work like a corporate lawyer in terms of the hours you're putting in.
It's so much more fun than being a corporate lawyer.
So there's that advantage.
But also, like, anything that you do.
This is something I realized, like, I made some money, some actual money last weekend
streaming Pokemon.
And I was like, huh, maybe I could be one of these professional video game streamers.
But the thing is that, like, anything that's work becomes work.
Like, and those guys, I say guys, because they're just mostly guys.
They're women who do it, too.
But those guys who are professional streamers, they're doing like, 11 hours a day of this
stuff.
And I mean, you know, okay, so they're playing video games for a living.
I'm sure they love it and wouldn't trade it for anything.
But there's got to be days where they're like, I don't feel like playing Call of Duty today,
but I have to to pay the gas bill.
And I just play Scrabble once in a while.
Yeah.
Just long for reading.
Yes, yes, exactly.
I kind of long for reading.
I don't get to read that much anymore.
Because, yeah, I just don't have time.
Yeah.
I mean, I'm very lucky that the fans sometimes buy me books from my Amazon Wishlist.
I have a big pile of them stacked up at the moment.
I suppose I don't have much time to read because drama school is getting very intense in the
final term.
But yeah, I'm reading and you, in fact, you, the laptop are currently stacked on top of
a few books.
One of which is Marjorie Garber's, what is it?
Vested Interests, which is all right.
It's kind of slow going.
I'm reading that and I'm also reading, I got it for my birthday, Vladimir Nabokov's Arda,
which is good, but it's kind of long.
So it's slow going, but then I have a little long tube journey.
Yeah.
The year before I started doing this channel, I was trying to, my initial idea was I was
going to write fiction.
That was what I thought I wanted to do when I left grad school.
That's great.
And yeah, great.
But it's not like, man, if you want that as a career, like, God help you.
Yeah, it's very difficult.
I eventually gave up on it, but I was reading so much because I was just doing jobs to get
by.
So I was an Uber driver in Baltimore, also horrible, horrible job, never do it.
I was like a copy editor.
I taught a couple of classes, but I, you know, just worked enough to pay the rent and I had
a ton of time to read.
So I read all these classic novels.
I read Moby Dick.
I read Middlemarch.
I read just things that I will never, I'll probably never have a year of my life that
has so much ambitious reading in it starting now, which in some ways is too bad because
I feel like reading all this stuff, it does, like, it expands your mind.
It's actually good for you.
I missed reading fiction.
I don't get to read, I don't really love fiction, which is why this person got me harder and
why I'm working my way through 20,000 weeks under the sea as well.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I miss reading fiction.
Yeah.
I'd like to do it.
I just, I mean, I guess I could, I could make time if I really wanted to.
It would be less tweeting.
Tweeting is the thing that's got to go.
I spent so much time tweeting.
Yeah.
I deleted Twitter off my phone a while ago.
Yeah.
And it's the future.
It's amazing.
Yeah.
I've still got it on my laptop, so I can do all the kind of tweeting I need to do for
the channel.
But yeah, I got rid of it on my phone.
I'm like, oh, I can see birds.
It's amazing.
Yeah.
Yeah.
We had a thing on the course called living history where we go and we live in the 17th
century in character for a week, basically, but obviously no Twitter.
And everyone came back from that and was like, yeah, I'm deleting all this social media off
my phone.
And I was like, yeah, we're doing that too.
It was good.
Very good detox.
Someday I may well have to hit you up to do some Shakespearean stuff on my channel.
Oh, please, please do.
I would love to.
Yeah, I think that'd be a lot of fun.
I used to have a second channel called Shakespeare Vlogs where I would vlog in character of Shakespeare.
Oh my gosh.
And it would start off as Hamlet being like, oh, I'm really sad about my day and blah,
blah, blah.
But then it would go into reverse.
Why is this not in my life?
I'm probably going to bring it back once I stopped it just before I started my training
because I thought, okay, I'm getting better, but I might get into bad habits if I don't
have any guidance.
So I think over the summer, hopefully, hopefully, and now that I've said it on the live stream,
of course, people will hold me to it.
Hopefully, over the summer, I'd like to bring that back under some kind of guise because
that was a lot of fun.
And it's all practice towards the acting as well, which is good.
It's good stuff.
But yeah.
Yeah, I think it's a good idea.
I think that I can definitely imagine there being an audience for it.
One thing that's fascinating is even though people, I feel, don't read that much these
days, fiction is kind of pretty marginal as an art form.
You know, this is something I noticed when I was trying to write and read it is that
contemporary fiction is a very specialized area where I think most people are sort of
not plugged into it.
But people love Shakespeare still.
They just love it.
And I'm not sure why exactly.
I mean, obviously, it's great, but lots of things are great, and people don't love those
things.
You know, but people love Shakespeare.
Yeah, it's beautiful.
Milton is beautiful.
People don't love Milton.
That's true.
That's true.
I would love Shakespeare because I'm an actor.
I have so many brilliant roles in it.
And yeah, I could go on for hours.
But yeah.
No, I would like to do a Shakespearean channel.
And if you ever need any Shakespeare, let me know.
I almost definitely will need some Shakespeare.
Oh, I'd love to.
Super duper.
Right.
Well then, I suppose I really should write this essay on Brecht.
All right.
All right.
Well, you can go write the essay on Brecht.
Because someone superchatted me to do a shot.
I'll do one more shot.
Oh, I don't really have to.
I just wanted to get you drunk faster.
That's what it is.
And then check out my Twitter later if you want to see my thing on Destiny.
I'm going to go think about what I'm going to say to try to talk him out of this nonsense.
What is it?
Or maybe he'll, I don't know, maybe he'll talk me into it.
I don't know.
But so it's Destiny.
He's a professional streamer.
He's a really interesting streamer because he, I like Destiny because he's a guy who
he tells the story of having been quite a bit of a shitlord a few years ago.
And he's since sort of backed out of those positions.
And that's an intensely attractive thing to me because it makes me feel like I'm not wasting
my goddamn time.
And also, I feel like to some extent I've moved in the same direction over the last
several years.
So I tend to hit it off really well with him.
But he wants to make the philosophical case that there's a good analog between transracialism
and transgenderism, which is something that is extremely frowned upon in social justice
circles.
So I'm going to go and talk to him about it.
But anyway, thank you.
Oh, I guess I'll do my shot now.
Oh, yeah, go for it.
Yeah, down with fascism, down with a pen.
Down with fascism.
What a drink.
Well, on that note, thank you all for tuning in.
And Oli, thank you so much for...
God damn it, there's a kangaroo in this stream.
Thank you, Oli, so much.
My pleasure.
Thank you so much for having me.
It's been lovely.
Yes, we'll have to do this again sometime.
All right.
Thanks, everyone, for watching.
Bye, everyone.
Bye.
