There's one thing I've noticed about all the Golden Crocoduck nominees over the years.
They're nearly all men, or of indeterminate sex, and I began to wonder, is the proud public
display of ignorance somehow just a male thing?
Are women a bit more modest about displaying their private foibles in public, or are they
so much smarter than men?
The realisation was prompted by the fact that we have one lone female nominee for this
year's Golden Crocoduck, who goes by the YouTube name of Aminakin.
Before I tear into her, I'll say this for Aminakin.
Even if she doesn't understand evolution, at least she's tackling a serious science
subject instead of projecting the stereotypical image of women as obsessed with hair and make-up.
So here is her thoughtful opinion of Charles Darwin.
The Elemis Pro Radiance Cream Cleanser, I've used this before because my sister used it,
and it was just...
Inside this kit you get three pieces of skincare, and give you see instead of using your cleanser
in the morning, it's a very simple, basic, everyday eyeliner.
God damn it, will you stop talking about skincare, eye cream and cleanser and give us your opinion
on Charles bloody Darwin?
Basically, his theories had something to do with this idea that man became more and more
intelligent, and as man did so, as man evolved, man became whiter and whiter.
That's basically Darwin's theory.
Where do I start?
Well, let's start with the fact that Darwin's theory, as you call it, is not a theory, but
a principle called natural selection.
And the principle of natural selection says nothing about people becoming whiter as they
get more intelligent.
It shows how genetic traits that favour survival get passed on to successive generations.
I have no idea whether Darwin thought people got whiter as they got more intelligent, and
it really doesn't matter.
All sorts of silly ideas were believed in the 19th century, including the idea that
the superiority of the white races proved creation, and that inferior races had become
savages because of their fall from the Garden of Eden.
Whatever people thought 150 years ago, whether they were arguing for or against creation,
makes no difference to our current scientific knowledge.
But in case Darwin ever did think that intelligence makes you whiter, I'm happy to say that the
principle of natural selection and 100 years of research shows that he was wrong.
In fact, natural selection suggests that our ancestors must have got blacker as they became
more intelligent, because when they emerged from the trees and began hunting on the savannah,
they lost their protective covering of fur.
As a result, more melanin was produced in the skin to shield it from the sun's ultraviolet
rays.
But the loss of fur and the gain in intelligence were not genetically linked, they simply evolved
together through natural selection.
Similarly, as humans migrated out of Africa to more extreme latitudes, they lost melanin
because they had less need for protection from ultraviolet radiation, and the paler
skin allowed them to absorb what limited ultraviolet radiation they were exposed to in order to
synthesize vitamin D.
How is it Amenakin failed so miserably to understand natural selection, or the fact
that it shows no link between skin colour and intelligence?
It all started, of course, with the obligation to follow religious doctrine.
We're not supposed to believe in evolution, we're not supposed to believe that this is
how it happened, so I really wanted to look into it and see what Islam had to say about
all this.
I happened to come across this book randomly one day, and I was completely hooked as soon
as I began to read it.
At the front it says, the scientific collapse of Darwinism and its ideological background.
You know, if you want to find out what Darwin's basic idea was, why not read the paper he
co-wrote, or the book he wrote?
Better yet, get up to date, because there's been well over a century of research since
Darwin published The Origin of Species.
Let me explain.
If I wanted to read and understand, say, the history of Islam, I think you'd be the first
to criticise me if the only book I singled out for reading was titled Why Islam is a
Load of Nonsense.
Wouldn't you suggest I read a history textbook, or perhaps check what I was reading against
other sources, to verify that Why Islam is a Load of Nonsense isn't leading me up the
garden path?
When I began to read this book, this book really takes it from the start.
It actually explains that in order to believe in the theory of evolution, you've not only
got to believe that man evolved from ape, but that the very, very first molecule that
ever existed came about by chance.
No, you don't have to believe that at all.
You just need a fifth grader's understanding of basic chemistry.
The first atoms were hydrogen and helium, so it's likely that the first molecules were
hydrogen atoms joined together in a covalent bond.
If you believe this happened by chance, then we wouldn't be able to repeat that reaction
billions of times over in science classrooms, of the kind you fell asleep in.
Here's an experiment I used to do with my kids in the garden shed.
Take some zinc, add hydrochloric acid, and you'll get a reaction.
Each of the hydrogen atoms joins in pairs to make hydrogen gas, and each zinc atom combines
with two chlorine atoms to make zinc chloride.
This isn't pure chance, it's 100% predictable and reliable because it's based on simple
chemistry.
If everything happened by chance, then you really have to extend it right to the beginning
of life itself.
So you really have to think about it in terms of life being a product of the building blocks
which are protein molecules, and then he sort of breaks it down and he says, okay, protein's
made of amino acids.
So you really have to think about the idea that when the Earth came about after the Big
Bang, there were these amino acids that somehow got formed by chance.
The atomic matter just happened to sort of form itself into amino acids.
Amino acids didn't somehow get formed by chance.
We know how amino acids form just as we know how hydrogen atoms form.
Again, it's chemical bonding.
Look, if you don't want to add a book on chemistry to your rather lonely library, let me explain
the subject through something you're more familiar with, cosmetics.
It lasts for ages.
Now it's a 10% benzoyl peroxide acne treatment gel, that's what it says on the front.
Great.
So you accept that there's a chemical called benzoyl peroxide.
What makes one set of chemical reactions a natural part of a daily beauty regime and
another set of chemical reactions an impossible chance happening?
Of course you can say that at the beginning of time an invisible being dictated that this
is how atoms should interact.
Believe what you like.
But the fact is that this is how chemicals do interact in a way that's controlled and
predictable and well understood.
There are billions of smart women out there, but it's nice to know that a few of them can
match creationist men when it comes to complete ignorance of basic science.
And just in case anyone thinks I'm being sexist by continually focusing on creationist men,
let's redress the balance a bit with pothole of salute to creationist women.
Well, isn't that special?
For years carbon dating was believed to be the best way to accurately date artifacts.
Recently experts have discovered it's not as accurate as evolutionists would like me
to think.
The revolution is a product of chance happenings that led to the formation of us.
There's microevolution within species, but not going from one species to another.
Oh really?
There is a controversy among scientists about whether evolution is a bad thing or not.
Evolution is a myth and even Darwin can tell.
Why are monkeys still evolving into humans?
No, I do not believe in evolution, I do not think it should be taught in school.
I do feel that evolution shouldn't be taught in school just because of so many different
views on it.
Evolution should be taught as what it is, as a theory, but evolution should be taught
as facts.
I think facts, not theories, should be taught.
Yes, let's stop teaching scientific theories in school, like heliocentric theory that says
the Earth revolves around the Sun, atomic theory, germ theory, plate tectonic theory,
and let's not forget the theory of tides.
That's right Billy, we stopped teaching scientific theories in school and then it's anybody's
guess what makes the tides go in and out.
And thanks to all the girls for the chance to show that for every Ken, there's a Barbie.
only not somebody's imagination or hope or whatnot.
