Our wall filled out since last week.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Cheers.
We put up our favorites and what appeared to be the fan favorites as well, so.
And doing so in my still morticia makeup, because...
That looks very good on you.
Does it?
I think so.
I thought it looked better with my hair down, obviously, because then it's like...
What?
Once again, thanks to everyone who submitted their artwork for the book cover contest.
It was a really hard choice, and we really appreciate your contributions.
You guys were awesome.
We have, however, made our decision, and we have for you now the reveal of what it will
be, the book cover of Awoken by Sarah Ellenson.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Or hell, let's just plaster this on the digital.
Dink, dink.
So yeah, we ended up going with Ariel Johnson for a number of reasons.
I feel like, in fairness, this cover is a little dated, but then again, so is paranormal
romance for teenagers.
So I think it kind of works for what it is, someone, this Sarah Ellenson character trying
to catch on to a trend years after that ship has sailed.
And we also ended up going for the tagline with, in dreams he came, because...
You can never have too much fantasy.
Yeah, and phantom gets brought up a lot in this book.
It's like the Wuthering Heights of the book, or yeah, it was like Wuthering Heights for
Twilight in Fifty Shades, it was Tests of the Dubervilles, and so here, it's just Phantom
of the Opera.
Sarah Ellenson is just that well read.
That means our launch is good to go, it's still gonna be on August 30th, two thousand
and...
Thirteen.
Thirteen!
Man, we're so much faster than real publishing.
Since our release is August 30th, what we're really trying to see is if we can get a lot
of people to purchase the book, either in hard copy or e-book form.
Especially e-book.
Especially e-book.
It's gonna be a lot cheaper.
That it will be, and it will be very nicely formatted too, to push this baby up.
See how high we can climb in young adult paranormal romance fiction, just to see how far up that
ladder Sarah will go.
To save the day.
On that one day.
If she'll like, crack the top thousand or something, that would be hilarious.
Amazon doesn't do pre-orders for self-publishers, probably because self-publishers are flaky.
Which is understandable, so it's like, basically, it's on sale when it goes live.
But meanwhile, on the 30th also, for those of you in the New York area, we will be hosting
a book launch party at Enigma Bookstore in Astoria.
Yeah, we're gonna have a book release party, and it's gonna be fun, and special guests
will be there, like Sarah's picture.
And I believe we have Kyle Owen Citizen Colgren will be doing a reading from our opus in his
Shakespearean way.
Hopefully some wine, but no promises on that one, so it depends on the bookstore.
But definitely not.
Yeah, so it'll be at Enigma Bookstore on August 30th at, I think, 8pm, and it will run until
the wee small hours of 10?
We do need to know how many people are coming, so please RSVP on the Facebook event page,
which you can find on our Facebook page, which is here.
And the event, of course, is called Sexy Cthulhu Book Release Party, and a good time will be
had by all, so we look forward to seeing you there.
As ever, keep your eye on Sarah Ellen's Facebook, on her Twitter, and on the website.
And on her blog, sometimes she blogs about how tragic her internet life is, and how people
were mean to her because they gave her good criticism.
How dare they?
I mean, she's an English major.
She's an English major!
