I mean, we were like, we could play it cool and act like we didn't already shoot this
episode months ago, but it's currently on this thing, which we are having a hard time
getting it off of, because the other two shoot to SD cards, this sucker shoots on tape.
And it's not cooperating, so.
So damn you, giant camera A. How dare you.
Camera A is out of commission.
So what do we got?
We finally get to break into the Finnish liquor that our friend Rita brought with her many
months ago, many, many months ago, brought with her on her great New York adventure.
And we met up with her.
And the first one, I think I'm only drinking because it is a licorice one.
It also needs to be served, chilled and shaken.
Oh my God, that is black as sin.
Holy.
Wow.
So that's what they do when the long never ending nights.
So, and like Finland will laugh at my pronunciation.
From what I understand, this is called, uh, Salmari?
Cold spiteful language.
It's um.
Is this like, is the backwards K like a backwards K like corn?
It's rad.
You know what?
It is Finland.
I feel like that could be.
They did give us Lordi.
Anyway, I just want to read the thing on the back of it though.
Deep in its dark licorice infused heart, is an unforgettable drinking experience waiting
to be released.
Drink as shots, but don't be misled.
Experience the spirit of Finland and taste Finnish folklore.
This is appropriate since we're talking about a book that's going to take place in India.
I know.
Which is the opposite of Finland.
How appropriate of us.
I'm embracing the heart of Finland right now.
Oh!
So that's the heart of Finland.
Okay.
How's the heart of Finland?
It's licorice.
It's, um, it's, it's got the, the winter chill on it.
Also the, the, the bitter of forever night, the boredom of never seeing the sun.
Yeah.
It's a lot nicer than Jaeger.
Oh yeah.
Oh, you know what?
Yeah, totally.
So.
Like considerably.
So.
All right.
And then we have our other things courtesy of Rita.
Wall stuff, because we need wall stuff.
Like, yeah.
Including the fan art from Nella's Tiger's Courtesy Cats.
I've actually got to print some of those up and put them on because they are delightful.
But if you want to give us alcohol from your region of the world, that's okay too.
We totally accept any.
Find a way to ship it.
Technically illegal in New York.
When we last left off last season, which is totally deliberate that we divvied this up
between several months.
When we last left off, it was, um, we were going to A, talk about, uh, some people's
ideas for the outline and B, we were going to review The Girl with All the Gifts, which
we will do next episode.
Also a lot of stuff, like we're, we're leaving Channel Awesome.
So that's a thing.
Yeah.
Uh, if you're watching this on Channel Awesome, you might want to start following us on Twitter
or something.
Yeah.
Uh, follow us over to Shea Apocalypse.
Yeah.
This will probably be the last episode on Channel Awesome.
So it's been real y'all.
Yeah.
We're going to still go just, you know, uh, as, as separate entities flying free.
We're leaving the nest.
Yeah.
We had a bunch of comments that were just ideas for Awoken book two, which what was
it?
Was it going to be, it was either Arisen or Aliven.
Yeah.
We haven't decided yet.
Yeah.
We still haven't, you know, we haven't, or another Mary.
No, I feel like another has to be book three.
I just feel like after two, like when we actually get around to writing three, people would
be like another?
Cause it's been a little while.
Uh, what was the basic thrust of the book or this plot?
And you know, obviously it will, you will appreciate it more if you follow Nella's Tiger's
Curse recaps.
Yes.
Which I also took a break from.
It's like, you know, that scene where Sam and Frodo are on the mountains, like the slopes
of Mount Doom and it's like, no, I can't remember, you know, the taste of food.
Or, you know, water or light.
That's what Tiger's Curse has been for me.
And we had to, you had to finish that cause it's like this, this book is more like where
Awoken was more parody of Twilight.
This one is more parody of Tiger's Curse.
So if you're curious as to what that means, definitely go check up the recaps of Tiger's
Curse under Let's Read with Nella.
I've, uh, I've been getting comments from people saying like, just your recaps are painful
for us.
Like this book is terrible.
The most amazingly redundant book.
Oh, it's so redundant.
So the basic plot of Awoken book two, um, Arisen or Aliven, kind of like Aliven, cause
I feel like that was, that was a big complaint with the first one was that it was too stealth
a parody.
Yeah.
And like, maybe it's just like, you know what?
We had our fun being kind of a stealth parody.
Maybe let's go a little more cracked out.
Yeah.
So the thrust of book two is, you know, it starts with this sort of breaking dawn thing
where, um, not Edward, Riley leaves her for her own good again, because he did that in
the first book.
Although I'm really, after reading, uh, Tiger's Curse, I really do feel like it has to be
like the rich, like family member, like the ex-Bollywood uncle who flies in a school trip
to India.
You will, you want to just like an excuse for Mr. Kadam.
Yes, I do.
Who needs an excuse?
Mr. Kadam is the only redeeming factor of Tiger's Curse.
No, we could have that.
And then it turns out it was Uncle Neil the whole time.
Mm.
Like he wanted to get some balls rolling.
Uh, yeah.
Like, oh, it was me all along.
I was the turkey.
But then would Uncle Neil then be able to drive a car out of the Ganges?
Because I really have this mental image in my head of him driving a car out of the Ganges
and it's kind of delightful.
Well, I don't know.
Here's the thing.
I kind of feel like Uncle Neil and a Kadama-like are a little mutually exclusive.
Mm.
But then, you know, both characters would be kind of redundant since Uncle Neil was
the awesome character that you wanted the book to be about and who keeps getting cut
off.
So the basic thrust is we go to India, somehow or other there's like a super powerful thing
that happens and everyone assumes that Andy is the special Lego movie style because she
is the, you know, she's the white girl that outnatives the natives a la Avatar and all
that fun stuff.
Mm.
But then eventually the plot happens and we find out that Vic is the special.
Yeah.
But like everything just lines up just so it makes it seem like it was her.
Yeah, and everyone just assumes it's her.
Except for Bri.
I think Bri would be the one like foreshadowing things.
I don't know.
It's like, this prophecy says born of this land.
My great grandmother's Cherokee.
Oh, God.
Oh, God.
Oh, God.
It's like Andy should have like a great great something that was like English but she like
was born in India.
I think.
So that's why she thinks.
I don't know.
I'm still kind of enamored with Cherokee princess, but I don't even know if Andy is that dense.
I know.
Well, things to ponder.
Which kind of Indian should Andy claim?
Hayley Combs suggests that all the other kids in Andy's class be respectful and understanding
of Indian culture in the background, but Andy is just the hapless white savior princess
who has no idea of anything at all.
Do we want to do like the totally like over-the-top like caste discrimination?
Like, should there be like overt caste discrimination?
I don't think Sarah would know about the caste system.
No, but I feel like, I mean, I feel like that's that thing that Westerners like.
I don't know.
It's like Colleen Houk didn't.
She kind of like mentioned it in this like I read a Wikipedia article.
Or that like, well this happened in the past.
Like she'd like conflate Varnas with caste.
You know, like, okay, there's four Varnas, but there's like 90 bajillion castes.
And she's like, well, they're the same thing.
Yeah.
You know, and like, and like I read the Wikipedia article.
It's like, I'm Kshatriya.
And like, and then that's all you need to know.
I mean, maybe someone could be like, wait a minute.
That, you know, it's like, there's a lot of castes and Varnas and castes.
Like, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh.
That should be Bree.
Bree should always be the voice of Bree.
Yeah.
And Toli Berra, also speaking of Bree, suggests that Vic and Bree maybe hook up as a sort
of parody of Renesmee Jacob.
We got to find a way to make that creepy if we're going to go that way.
I know.
Creepy-er.
It has to be creepy.
But let's get back to the TIFF.
Okay.
Because, you know, in the beginning, like, I think the idea was that he would, or that
Riley would accidentally try to soul snack on Andy.
Uh-huh.
Well, they were together.
Oh, yeah.
Like she's.
But Toli Berra writes that Riley's no soul snacks.
I think he should go after criminals because, and I quote, I selected them because I want
to make the world safer for you.
Yeah.
And, like, the TIFF maybe.
Either she'd be that super romantic.
No, no, she's like.
No, I think it's like he almost soul snacks her, like, in their sleep or something.
Yeah.
And then, like, afterwards, while he's gone out.
Like he sleep snacks.
Yeah, he goes out and states his lust.
He's like, I found some petty thieves.
Yeah.
They were arrested on minor drug charges.
Oh, my God.
They were 16.
Oh, God.
And she's like, well, that's great that you only go after criminals.
I don't know.
I like the idea that he only goes.
But.
He only goes after criminals.
But.
But it's like drug.
That would certainly knock off a whole bunch of people of our Patreon folks that have been
donating money.
That's a good point.
So.
The petty criminal.
Again, we all.
Some of you might be petty criminals.
We didn't promise that the people who Patreon on that top level would get to die.
Like, not only are they going to be written into the book, but they get to die a horrible
being eaten by Cthulhu death.
So that's.
That's not incentive.
I don't know what is.
Aurelia Verity writes that.
At first, Andy speaks about how clearly important it is to do missionary work and help people
and how they're going to change people's lives while they're there.
And clearly, at this point, these will be Sarah's words.
And Andy is just the mouthpiece.
And like that whole idea.
Like, well, maybe there's a missionary element.
Like.
She doesn't use that word.
Like building houses.
It's like Habitat for Humanity.
Yeah.
It's a field trip.
It's weird.
It's like whatever.
They're building wells.
We do that.
That's a really popular thing to do.
Like.
Arthur Limbo suggests that the whole India thing is framed like the Lizzie McGuire movie.
And, you know, and there's like this part.
For instance, there's this part where Lizzie rides on a motorcycle with like a random stranger.
She gets to ride on like an elephant with Vic.
Yeah.
Ethnic third wheel.
Well, going back to Aurelia, they write.
Although they're on a school trip, Vic and Andy just wander off, off into different cities
and temples for hours and days.
And no teacher or supervisor cares or notices.
Which, yes, I think that absolutely needs.
So like.
And then there's an elephant that happens.
I think there needs.
There has to be a romantic elephant at some point.
And also like just to run with Tiger's Curse.
Absolutely no forms are signed.
No worries about passports.
No worries about paperwork.
Yeah.
It's just like a week before the plane takes off.
Like someone's like, hey, kids, let's dig wells in India.
Over spring break.
And you're like, yeah, that's the legitist thing.
Shiksabell suggests possibly inappropriate comparison between Andy and Riley's relationship
and the Ramayana.
But perhaps that would be giving Sarah too much credit.
I agree.
But she could just get it wildly wrong.
I think that's a wiki article.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Inujade points out that you could in-universe call Loki and his elk the young gods as opposed
to the Lovecraftian old gods.
Because remember, the joke or our basic plot was there was going to be some like pseudo
Indian bad guy.
And then it turns out it was Loki the whole time.
And that's going to be the plot.
Yeah.
And he's trying to bring about Ragnarok.
But then going back to the god thing.
And Piano Slave points out, going off the multiple god idea, maybe there can be a council
where all the different gods get together and talk like in the vampire council thing
in New Moon.
Or we could save that for the third book.
I feel like that could be the opening of the third book.
Like all the gods gathering.
Yeah, like turns out there's like a big god council.
And maybe Sarah actually kind of has like an imagination.
I don't know.
Chrysander the Great brings up the romantic scene between Vic and Andy should be inspired
by the magic carpet ride from Aladdin.
Yes.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
Except it should be a romantic elephant ride under the stars.
So I think we're all on the same page here.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And it should be really direct.
Like, tell me Andy, when did you last let your heart decide?
And finally, Froglet suggests that Andy should be jealous of a woman whose soul Riley is
trying to eat.
Maybe in that sort of, it's not what it looks like scenario.
Absolutely.
I hope she's also a petty drug criminal.
Well, I mean, she has like an ounce of marijuana and deserves to die.
Yeah.
So thus with our little outline begins our season two.
So, yeah.
What would you like to see, Nella?
Is it technically season three at this point?
So thus...
Stuff is strong.
Yeah.
It hurts your head.
Noble liquor.
Noble.
So thus with our little outline, we start our season three.
So at the beginning of season two, we started reviewing things in addition to working on
the Viridian Saga.
Yeah.
What would you like to see this season, Nella?
Oh, gosh.
I think I would just like to see some better books with female protagonists and, you know,
love on the romance and maybe on the sci-fi fantasy element.
Especially on the YA side.
Yeah.
Hashtag never.
Well, there's also, we might branch into interviews more because we did that once last season.
Yeah.
So what do you want us to read?
Yeah.
So now we need to start whittling down our options.
Of course, there is, of course, this.
Ooh, a sequel.
Which we didn't even really discuss the first one except...
I know.
As it pertained to...
Lock-in.
This.
But that is something to consider.
But, of course, also keep in mind that, you know, I am still working on Tiger's Curse.
Yeah.
So if we could...
You might die.
Lay off.
Well, if we could lay off the really terrible books, that'd be nice.
That's a good point.
Yeah.
I feel like while we're making fun of things like Tiger's Curse and writing things like
Awoken, you know, when we do our read-alongs, we want to at least think that...
Experience girl.
Take the genres that we like and make them rise above, you know.
I mean, Shades of Grey filled me with a powerful hate, but it was thoughtful.
It was a thoughtful hate.
It was so powerful.
It was a thoughtful hate.
There was a lot of thinking and discussion and all sorts of fun things.
I think that was the wonderful thing about The Girl with All the Gifts, which we are going to be discussing next time.
So if you can get a hold of it, do and follow along with us.
Yes.
Spoilers.
It is excellent.
It's so good.
Like, it's going to be a really boring episode because it's just going to be gushing.
So...
But oh, the gushing.
It's going to be some profound gushing, so...
Such gush.
Yeah.
So tell us what you'd like us to talk about this season.
If there's any kind of branching out that might interest you, author interviews or genre,
bear in mind we won't branch out too much.
Yeah.
And as always, leave comments at SheaApocalypse.com.
Those are where we actually tabulate the comments because we have a system.
If you're on YouTube, go to SheaApocalypse.com where there are comments allowed.
And as always, follow us on Twitter at SheaApocalypse.
You can follow Sarah on Twitter as well.
Hopefully she will start updating with her observations on the writing life and hashtag amwriting and hashtag blessed and all that fun stuff.
Let's have a good and productive 2015.
Cheers.
Cheers.
