Censorship blocks the expression of good ideas and inhibits the scrutiny of bad ones. It
retards civilization. Our modern Western civilization is an icon to the worth and fruits that freedom
of expression and freedom of speech can deliver. However, still in the background, there are
those who would happily promote censorship, either legal or illegal, to protect their
ideas from public analysis. Creationists have now clearly adopted the abuse of a legal instrument
constructed for the protection of copyrighted material, the Digital Millennium Copyright
Act or DMCA, as their weapon of choice in attempting to censor those critical of their
beliefs. Over the last year or so, at least five creationist organizations and individuals
have filed multiple, multiple baseless DMCAs against work critical of them. All of those
that were opposed were won by individuals who recognized the danger posed by allowing
such abuse. The offending creationist organizations and individuals include Creation Science Evangelism
founded of course by the convicted fraudster Kent Hovind, Illustria Media, a subsidiary
of the Discover Institute, that's the creationist organization at the core of the intelligent
design movement, Answers in Genesis and their front man Ken Ham, Venom Fang X, of course,
who filed over 150 DMCAs, and the Eternal Media, among others. In response to this,
we have formed a now multinational alliance. We have formed this alliance as a defense
mechanism against the abuse of the DMCA. We have now pulled our legal knowledge and it
should be borne in mind that even as individuals we were hammering these creationists on every
baseless DMCA they filed. Secondly, we have decided to immediately name and shame any
creationist organization who files a baseless DMCA claim. If you try filing a baseless DMCA
claim, it is likely, given that we have maybe 100,000 subscribers between us, that maybe
a million people will know about it within a week. Finally, it should be stated that
every time you file and lose a DMCA claim, you just bring that time one day closer when
one of you will end up in front of a judge for this. We defend reason, we defend western
values, and we defend freedom of speech from those who were limited for dogmatic reasons.
And now, due to this pattern of creationist behavior, we do it as one. The following is
a message from a few of our number.
Particular organizations and individuals appear to have demonstrated a track record of misusing
DMCA's to censor comment and criticism. Even if you receive legal advice that you are likely
to be protected under the Fair Use provisions, the idea of fighting a DMCA is not simply
a legal issue. It's a commitment to stick it out against these organizations and their
underhanded tactics to avoid criticism of their misinformation. After all, you have
to hand over to them your personal details when you lodge the counterclaim. When I made
that decision to stand up and fight against this misuse of DMCA's, I found that I was
not alone. I'm not sure if we realize the potential we all have as a collective. I'm
not sure if we realize that a collective action on all our parts is far more powerful than
the sum of all our individual actions. The time for tolerating this misuse is at an end.
Please feature, favorite and share this video in addition to the copies on our other channels.
I grew up in a pre-internet world where anytime you got into a discussion on any topic, whether
it was history, science, religion, matters of social politics and scandal, whatever the
subject was, wherever you were talking to, you might pull up whatever urban legend was
necessary to back up his story at the time. There was no way on the fly to figure out
what information was actually factual and what was just made up on the spot, statistic-wise.
The only way you could find out, the only way you could find out was if you went to
the library all day and perhaps not even then. So you had to give them, so you had to give
them the benefit of the doubt, especially if they seemed morally outraged by whatever
fact they just coughed up. Back then, propaganda and emotional arguments with made-up statistics
on the spot usually won. These are the people who want to bridle internet information, the
free expression of ideas that prohibit or limit their spread through the general public.
Controlling information and suppressing ideas is the means to manipulate the minds of the
masses, but ethnocentric bigotry and religious and nationalist propag-
But ethnocentric bigotry and religious or nationalist propaganda collapse in an unrestricted
global forum. That's why some would seek to silence, censor, restrict and restrain
contrary comments while we need to preserve and promote your right to say whatever you
want, whoever you are, no matter how wrong I can show you to be.
Many of my viewers know that I freely allow any and all comments, ratings and responses
on my channel, and this is because I believe the only way to settle a debate is to allow
everyone the right to speak. After all, when debate is genuinely free, the truth will always
win. But there are those out there who seek to silence the opinions of others, because
their agenda is threatened by rational inquiry. That they refuse to acknowledge criticism
is bad enough, but their rampant misuse of the DMCA to extend their branch of censorship
to YouTube accounts of those who refute them is completely unacceptable.
Sadly, because of these actions, free speech must be continually fought for. I urge you
to oppose DMCA abuse and stand up for free speech on YouTube.
And that's what I love about YouTube. It's a worldwide open forum that has the potential
to change minds across the world and present new opinions to people who've been cloistered
in narrow-minded communities and repressive regimes. At least, that's how it's supposed
to work. And that's why I'm standing against the false filing of DMCAs and urging YouTube
to take action against people who want to shut down channels and videos that challenge
their beliefs. I have no objection to the legitimate protection of copyright, but this
is an issue of fair use for the purpose of academic debate. In several cases, especially
those related to creationist preacher Kent Hovind, Hovind himself specifically says that
his videos are not copyrighted. But when some YouTubers used clips of his material in order
to refute Hovind, they were shut down because of false claims of breach of copyright.
Let's get this straight. This kind of action has nothing to do with the protection of copyrighted
material. It's a tactic designed purely and simply to shut up dissent, to silence
critics and stamp on freedom of speech. If this is allowed to continue, then YouTube
will eventually become just a boring mouthpiece of organizations that screen comments and
shut down critics. This is your medium, people. Stand up for it.
Hi, this is Vito Omega and I'm stating my support for the campaign against the abuse
of the DMCA. Censorship is basically when you silence people who are critical of your
opinions. The only time when censorship works is when you are infallible. Do you know anyone
who's infallible? Fight DMCA abuse. Fight censorship. This is your YouTube. Stand up for it.
This is Don Exodus. Censorship is a tool used by simple minds to mislead and misinform.
If the facts and reason aren't on your side, it's very easy to win a debate if there's
nobody to debate against. Please, oppose censorship in all its forms, whether it's
a false filing of DMCA copyright claims or simply deleting or disapproving of comments
that disagree with your videos.
CDK007 here. As many of you know, my channel is about the free exchange of ideas. I don't
censor voting, comments, or video responses. However, there are those who are more than
willing to suppress the speech of others in order to further their agenda. Since its inception,
a small minority of people have attempted to manipulate YouTube to censor ideas they
don't necessarily agree with. They have used a variety of techniques, but the false
filing of DMCA's is the most insidious. We don't need to sit back and let these
individuals steal our freedom. If we join together, we can convince YouTube to change
its policies. How do I know this can work? After people realized they could suppress
others by repeatedly down-thumbing every single comment under a video, we complained
and YouTube responded. This time I'm asking you to do more than just think about it.
Together, we can make a difference.
We would like to hear from you if you have been served with a DMCA notice that you consider
was issued in order to prohibit free expression rather than to protect copyright. We would
like to know how often it is happening, who served these notices, what happened as a result.
We believe that opportunity for education, freedom of expression and freedom of speech
are causes worth protecting. We want to do what we can to protect them. Please help us
do that. Feature, favorite, share, rate and comment on the copies of this video on all
our channels. Thank you.
