So, I hear you might be thinking about killing the author.
It's an exciting time in any person's life when they're deciding which literary theory
to apply to the way they read texts, but it's important to know what you're getting into,
and make sure that this literary theory is the right one for you.
What is it about death of the author that appeals to you, the reader?
Before you start applying literary theories, you want to make sure that you're doing it
for the right reasons.
There are an awful lot of young people out there who rush into death of the author without
really understanding its intended purpose.
Are you trying to enhance your understanding of a text by secluding yourself from authorial
intent or a body of work?
Or are you trying to excuse yourself from potential guilt when you find out that your
favorite author might be a shitbag, and you don't want to examine what that author does
with their platform?
There are a lot of people out there who advocate separating art from the artist, so they won't
have to examine the ethics of consuming art from people who use their platform to do things
that might be a little iffy, maybe even harmful.
Before we jump in, we need to understand that applying a literary theory and examining the
ethics of watching The Usual Suspects knowing what we now know about its director and star
are two very separate issues, and it can be confusing, and you need to be careful not
to conflate the two.
With that in mind, let's talk about death of the author.
Is death of the author right for you?
Are you ready to kill the author?
And is death of the author really even possible to apply to any text in our platform and personal
brand-obsessed culture?
Well, today we're going to talk about that, learn a little something, and maybe even have
a little fun.
The Fault in Our Stars is a 2012 novel written
by John Green.
The plot of the novel revolves around two teenagers named Hazel Grace Lancaster and
Augustus Waters, the former living with terminal cancer and the latter in remission from his
as they begin a relationship.
In the process of developing their relationship, Hazel Grace shares her favorite book of all
time, An Imperial Affliction by a man named Peter Van Houten, with Augustus.
Though she loves the book, the book's ambiguous ending is a source of consternation for Hazel,
and she longs for nothing more than for the notoriously reclusive Van Houten to tell her
what happens after the book ends.
And so Augustus, having banked his wish from the Make-A-Wish Foundation, uses that wish
to make a trip to Amsterdam with Hazel and her mother to meet Van Houten.
But when they finally meet Van Houten, the two find not the kind, empathetic author that
they imagined, but a drunken misanthrope who refuses to answer their questions.
"'I can no more tell you what happens to her than I can tell you what becomes of Proust's
narrator, or Holden Caulfield's sister, or Huckleberry Finn after he lights out for the
territories.'
"'What happens after the book ends is nothing,' he insists.
"'The book is fiction.
It didn't happen.
It's not real.'
To which a livid Hazel Grace responds,
"'Bullshit!
That's bullshit!
Just tell me!
Make something up!''
Hazel has tied the idea that there is life for these characters after the book ends with
her own narrative.
She needs to believe that there is a life for these characters beyond the text.
Because she sees so much of herself in the text, right down to the protagonist living
with terminal cancer.
But in the end, the author of her favorite book has no answer for her.
And when, months later, feeling guilty about the way their interaction had ended, Van Houten
does come up with an answer.
But Hazel no longer wants to know.
So neither she, nor we, the reader, find out the fictional author's intent.
Furthermore, The Fault in Our Stars itself has an ambiguous ending.
We do not find out what becomes of Hazel Grace.
How much longer, if at all, Hazel survives her disease.
As a solitary text unto itself, The Fault in Our Stars could be read as an argument
in favor of death of the author.
Not only is the author completely unlike what the leads expect him to be, the author has
no answers for them.
Seeking out his authorial intent is an exercise in futility.
The author has emotionally moved on from the book.
And if he does have an answer to Hazel's question, he is not obligated to share it.
But moreover, his intent does not matter.
The book does not speak to Hazel because of the author's intent, but because of the
text itself.
The text, in isolation, is what means so much to Hazel.
As a text, this seems to be the theme of The Fault in Our Stars, that a part of growing
up is to stop looking to other people, especially authors, to explain the meaning behind texts,
but instead to figure out what your own reading is.
Of course, we can't know if this was the author's intent based on the text alone.
Fortunately, thanks to the magic of the internet, we do know exactly what the author thinks.
In a 2014 tweet, Green got a lot of attention and 10,000 retweets with the proclamation
that books belong to their readers.
Green elaborated on that stance in an interview in 2014.
I think authorial intent is pretty irrelevant, and I tend to agree with the school of literary
criticism that proclaims the death of the author.
When pressed on what happens after the end of The Fault in Our Stars in a way that remarkably
mirrors the way Hazel presses Van Houten, Green stated in a now-deleted 2012 blog entry,
I'm different from Peter Van Houten in many important ways, but in this respect, and some
others, we are the same.
I have access to the exact same text that you do.
My thoughts about the world outside of that text are not any more informed or authoritative
than yours.
It's not my book.
It's your book.
I don't make decisions about things that happen outside the text of the book.
I can't read something that isn't there any more than you can.
It's kind of rare to find an author with strong opinions on the concept of death of
the author, who goes out of their way not only to avoid making comments on what happens
outside of the text, but to bake that very notion into the text itself.
But of course, Green's approach is not the only one.
If we're talking about inserting authorial intent into texts well after they have been
published, then we need to talk about the hippogriff in the room.
But first...
In 1967, French literary critic and theorist Roland Barthes published his essay, L'Amour
or The Death of the Author, which was published in English the following year.
The simplest reduction of the essay's thesis is that readers should pull away from the
tenet of traditional literary criticism that focused on authorial intent and instead adopt
a more text-oriented approach that focused on the interaction between the reader and
the text, not between reader and the author.
But to understand how this idea first came about, first we need to put ourselves into
the headspace of French academia in the mid-1960s.
Across academia, but particularly in humanities-related fields like literature, linguistics, philosophy,
and anthropology, we were seeing a trend away from a structuralist methodology, i.e. a methodology
that saw facets of human culture as intrinsically related to a broader, overarching system or
structure.
By the 1960s, academia now saw itself trending towards a post-structuralist point of view,
fueled by thinkers like Foucault, Barthes, and my good friend Derrida.
Some questioned the more binary relationship of structuralism, that you couldn't make
X assumption about X person slash social group slash work of art just because X person came
from a certain place, experienced a certain thing, spoke a certain language, ate a certain
thing for breakfast, etc.
And if it's beginning to sound like post-structuralism involves a lot of complicated French navel-gazing,
academic bloviating, that's because it does.
But for the purposes of keeping this short and sweet, we'll keep our discussion of
post-structuralism contained to where it concerns Barthes and novelists.
In Death of the Author, Barthes argues that writing is that neutral, composite, oblique
space where our subject slips away, the negative where all identity is lost, starting with
the very identity of the body, writing.
In other words, Barthes argues that a piece of text is fundamentally divorced from the
author who made it.
And if it seems like a simple concept now, keep in mind.
In particular to the literary and visual arts, up until the 1960s, much of a creator's
work in academia was examined through a lens that tied together said creator and their
life.
Biography was king in helping to interpret or understand a work of art.
Take for example William Shakespeare's Macbeth.
Traditional readings of the text would argue that an understanding of both Scottish history
and Shakespeare's life are fundamental in understanding the play itself, how it pays
homage to King James I, who was king while it was being written, and how it reflects
the king's relationship to the author.
King James was also the patron of Shakespeare's acting company at the time.
But for Barthes, none of this background information would be pertinent in reading
Macbeth.
Meaning, to Barthes, lies in the language of a text itself, and whatever impressions
the reader creates from it.
The author is less of a god and more of a mere scripter.
And according to Barthes' contemporary Foucault, the work, which once had the duty of providing
immortality, now possesses the right to kill, to be its author's murderer.
Does it though?
French literary theorists in the mid to late 1960s probably weren't too concerned with
pop-cultural fan works and their relation not only to text, but to authorial intent,
and the author's body of work.
In no small part because it was not an organized thing in the way it would be only a decade
later.
But in discussions of death of the author and pop-culture media, the interaction between
author and fans is extremely relevant.
Take for instance a writer like Anne Rice, who takes an unusually hardline stance on
fan works, especially fan fiction.
From Rice's official website,
I do not allow fan fiction.
The characters are copyrighted.
It upsets me terribly to even think about fan fiction with my characters.
I advise my readers to write your own original stories, with your own characters.
It is absolutely essential that you respect my wishes.
Respect the author's wishes, fans!
How dare you make the gay vampires even gayer!
Anne Rice was not f***ing around either.
To be an Anne Rice fandom in the mid-2000s was to play a dangerous game of threats of
C&Ds and of litigation, and the near sum totality of fan works relating to the Vampire Chronicles
existed in locked-down, private, live-journal groups.
I bring up Rice because, on some level, she has a lot in common with Harry Potter author
J.K. Rowling, but in this one crucial regard, they are miles apart.
From the onset of Harry Potter's popularity, J.K.
Rowling has shown an interest in engaging with the fandom and, at most times, been downright
encouraging of fan works, not limited to fan art, fan fiction, fan resource sites,
and other things created by her audience.
Said Rowling's agent at Christopher Little Publishing,
J.K. Rowling's reaction is that she is very flattered by the fact that there is such great
interest in her Harry Potter series, and that people take the time to write their own stories.
So at a surface level, this seems like an ideal creator-audience relationship.
Your favorite author is not only fine with you and your Tumblr friends writing stories
about her characters, but she's an open book when it comes to answering any and all pedantic
nerd questions you might have about your faves.
What could go wrong with that?
Well, largely, it's the one thing she has in common with Rice, namely the sense that
they are the masters of the universe that they created as authors.
Ever since she joined Twitter, Rowling has had a tendency to post-scripturally insert
context, meaning, and intent into her text long after the text has been published, which
many fans love, but just as many take issue with.
Not just because of injecting non-textual intent, but because some of that intent comes
laden with...implications.
Like sure, we get that lycanthropy is a stand-in for disease stigmatization, but Rowling double-downing
on it and then explicitly stating that it is a wizarding world AIDS analog while making
one of the main werewolves in the series essentially a child predator with the explicit evil intent
of infecting people with his disease is...
Yikes.
And then there's Dumbledore.
At a public reading of the then-recently published last book in the series, Harry Potter and
the Deathly Hallows, when a fan asked if Dumbledore had ever loved anyone, Rowling responded,
"'My truthful answer to you, I always thought of Dumbledore as gay,' and that added to his
horror when Grindelwald showed himself to be what he was.
To an extent, Dewey's say it excused Dumbledore a little more because falling in love can
blind us to an extent, but he met someone as brilliant as he was, and, rather like Bellatrix,
he was very drawn to this brilliant person and horribly, terribly let down by him."
She added, "'Yeah, that's always how I saw Dumbledore.'
And even in 2007, that kind of intent declaration was already begging the question if representation
just for representation's sake, especially when there is no actual reference in the text
to Dumbledore's sexuality, was actually helpful, or if it was just shoehorn tokenizing for
the sake of staying relevant.
It is, in effect, claiming representation without having to do any of the work of including
it in the text because, hey, authorial intent.'
And yet, after all this, despite multiple opportunities to codify Dumbledore's sexuality
into the actual text, she still hasn't done it.
Rowling had the opportunity to actually codify this into later texts, as she is the sole
credited writer for both Fantastic Beasts movies, the latter of which touches directly
on Dumbledore's angst over his relationship with Grendelwald, but...
No homo.
LGBT representation in the Harry Potterverse exists only in the paratext, in the authorial
intent.
Therefore, according to Bart, it does not exist at all.
That said, of course authorial intent influences fan culture and inevitably creeps into the
way people read the text.
People take authorial intent as word of God, and use it to shut down readings that conflict
with the authorial's post-scriptural intent.
And that kind of sucks.
It's all well and good and valid to restrict the discourse on the Harry Potter series to
the text itself, and not what the author says about the text, but here's the thing.
That's neither how consuming art nor human nature works.
Text is inevitably consumed with paratext, and paratext influences the way the reader
interprets the text.
Simply knowing the discourse around Harry Potter influences the way you read Harry Potter,
whether you want it to or not.
In literary theory, paratext refers to materials supplied by authors, editors, printers, and
publishers.
This concept has more recently expanded to anything relating to the text, ranging all
the way from cultural context to personal brand to size and nature of online platform
and, most importantly, to personal identity.
It's not that trying to apply Barthes' idea is invalid, but that given the way culture
is trending and how the focus on personal brand and identity is only increasing, even
an author that tries to let their work speak for itself can never really die.
Foucault was actually way more hardcore than Barthes was.
Where Barthes stuck to literary theory, Foucault saw the author as a bigger problem within
a wider system of thought who got in the way of the discourse.
To Foucault, the author is an ideological figure, that people assign meaning to the
author's text just by virtue of who is saying it, rather than the meaning inherent in the
text.
But Foucault considered the decree that the author has disappeared to be an empty one
without praxis, and stated that we must locate the space left empty by the author's disappearance,
follow the distribution of gaps and breaches, and watch for openings this disappearance
uncovers.
In the year of our lord 2018, we call that thing personal brand.
And oh, your precious discourse has indeed been overtaken by cults of personality fifty
years later.
Fifty years later, the work does not possess the right to kill, to be its author's murderer,
because the work will always be tied to the brand, and in that brand lies a certain sort
of immortality.
What is brand can never die.
Foucault was a big proponent not only of shedding personal identity as it pertained to works,
but all the trappings of identity.
We would no longer hear the questions that have been rehashed for so long.
Who really spoke?
Is it really he and not someone else?
With what authenticity or originality?
And what part of his deepest self did he express in his discourse?
What difference does it make who is speaking?
How one person of one gender or one race in one time and one place reads Macbeth will
be read way differently than how someone else in completely different circumstances will
read it.
Same with who writes it.
And this is a huge shortcoming of Death of the Author in general.
It assumes that all people from all backgrounds have equal opportunity.
They don't.
And that all texts have equal opportunity for exposure based on the merit of the text.
They don't.
In a perfect world, Foucault would be right, and everyone would have equal opportunity
and all texts would be judged on their own merit and not tied to either the author's
identity or their body of work.
But we don't live in a perfect world, Michel.
Therefore, Foucault's ideas, and to a lesser extent, Barth's, can really only exist in
the world of pure theory, because who tells what story, what their background is, and
why they are telling it matters to readers, and is only mattering more and more as time
marches on.
If you read The Fault in Our Stars, independent of any paratext, and not reading the author's
note, all you know about the book is that it was written by...a man.
Probably.
That is as pure a reading as you are going to get.
But of course, this is not the reading most people had.
Most people knew the paratext, because the author had a platform, and a very large one.
The author puts on a friendly affect for his young, largely teenage audience every Tuesday.
Then you find out that the author was inspired to write the text, in part, because of an
actual human person who lived and died at the age of 16.
A human person who was also a YouTuber, who the author became friends with, in large part
because she was his fan.
This is not intent, but it is paratext, and it does influence the reading of the book.
As The Fault in Our Stars blew up in popularity, so too did the backlash.
Who are you, John Green, to even write this story?
Does it make it more legitimate that he knew Esther Earle, or does that make it more exploitative?
Is the whole enterprise exploitative?
In the years that followed, as The Fault in Our Stars continued to sell incredibly well,
the discourse began to focus on the author's identity, and the trend of so-called sick
lit that the novel helped popularize.
Which is to say nothing of the content of the novel itself.
People started to get upset about the fact that Hazel and Augustus share their first
kiss at the Anne Frank house.
And there are sex scenes in this book.
What kind of a grown-ass man writes sex scenes between two dying teenagers?
Who's that?
Oh, shit.
The Fault in Our Stars was a 2012 novel written by me, John Green, in which I, John Green,
am accidentally a character, kind of, which is what this video is about, sort of.
I said I'm not interested.
But you promised!
Nothing happens!
They're fiction!
They cease to exist the moment the novel ends.
But they can't!
What inspired, like, this idea that Van Houten was a reflection of you, that you're your
ugliest self?
Peter!
Well, I mean, I think before The Fault in Our Stars was published, I was interested
in the questions that I ended up writing about in The Fault in Our Stars because I'd been
asked thousands of times what happened to certain characters in my book, Looking for
Alaska.
And I started to understand that my response to that, my, like, somewhat defensive response
to that of, like, I'm not going to tell you, obviously I, you know, obviously I wanted
it to be ambiguous in the story and I still want it to be ambiguous, like, I started to
understand that that defensiveness that I had was misplaced, ultimately.
And so when people ask me the same question about Hazel or about The Fault in Our Stars,
I do think of it very differently now.
I feel much less defensive.
I still don't feel like I have answers for them, but I understand the question.
I understood that when people read books about people reading books, they inevitably put
the author of the book, especially if that person is a public figure, into the story.
Right?
Like, I remember being a kid and reading Catcher in the Rye and putting J.D. Salinger into
that story.
I couldn't help myself.
You know that song, If a Body Catch a Body Coming Through the Rye?
I'd like, it's If a Body Meet a Body Coming Through the Rye.
I felt like there was no way to write about writing without me being a character in the
story in some way.
Like, I was writing those parts of that book in 2010, 2011.
I understood by that time that I had a public life.
And, you know, in my own life, when I was a kid, I read books with the authors as characters
in them.
I might have even known that I shouldn't, but I couldn't help myself.
Like, we live in a personality-driven culture.
Even then we did.
A lot of people are only going to read John Green books because they have this parasocial
relationship with John Green.
And, you know, that's not invalid.
I played into it, right?
Like, it's not like I tried to avoid having a public life.
Like, I had an email address that they could Google.
I had a YouTube channel where they could comment.
Like, where did I get off saying that's an inappropriate question to ask this person
who has a Twitter?
That's the end of chapter one.
I wonder if there's just something about human nature.
If you read someone who tells a fiction, you feel connected to them, whether you know anything
about their lives or not.
Yeah, you at least feel a connection to the way that they imagine something, which is
intimate in a way.
And I don't know that there's any getting around that.
So Nerdfighters, join with Esther and me and tell someone you love that you love them today.
And so the question for me is how do authors interact with stories that they've invented
in this time?
I feel like the idea of death of the author kind of stemmed partially from this culture
that was very absolute and Bart kind of wanted to kill absolutes.
But in return it kind of created a different absolute.
I used to believe that the author should disappear insofar as possible from the text
and that the responsibility of the reader was to read the text and never think about
the author.
You know, like, I had this period in high school where I read everything in the context
of the author.
And then I had this long period of maybe 10 or 15 years where I tried to read nothing
in the context of the author.
And what I have arrived at at the moment, which I'm sure I will disavow in due time,
is that there is no way for an author's brand not to participate in the text if that author
has a public life or even if that author doesn't.
Right?
Like, J.D. Salinger famously did not have a public life, but he is all over those books.
And, like, when people read them, they read them in the context of J.D. Salinger.
And I feel like the absolutes in reading text create this problem where you're either constantly
guessing the author's intent or you're actively trying to divorce yourself from everything
you know about the world around you and the author.
And I just don't think that's realistic or helpful.
The first Amazing Night of Amazing I spent with Esther was at LeakyCon, a Harry Potter
conference.
And after all, if it weren't for Harry Potter, I would have no Esther.
And also, there probably wouldn't be a Nerdfighteria.
The more you know about my work, the more you know about my friendship with Esther.
Ow!
Too much.
Too much.
That was a headbutt.
Yeah.
The more you see me in that story, my hope is that the book works if you don't see me
in the story.
And I would honestly feel like the book failed if it needed me to be successful.
But at the same time, I am definitely aware of the fact that many of the people who read
it do see me in it.
I mean, that's why I wrote that author's note at the beginning was I wanted to try
to protect, insofar as possible, this is a little naive in retrospect, but I wanted to
try to protect the friendships that I'd had that were important to me, that had influenced
the story.
I wanted to keep them mine.
And that proved to be impossible.
And now I read that author's note and I think, oh, that's quite sweet that that author thought
that just putting a note in the beginning that says, don't read this autobiographically
is going to work.
The Fault in Our Stars is a 2012 novel written by John Green in which two children go to
great lengths to find out what happens after the ambiguous ending of the protagonist Hazel's
favorite book.
The way they do this is to seek out the notoriously reclusive author and find out the answer from
him.
But the entire idea is flawed from the get-go.
Not only does her hero let her down, she does not find her answer because there is none.
And that is a central theme of the text.
Sometimes there is no answer.
The universe is chaotic, life is unpredictable, and you have no control of when you will die.
And when you do die, you will not know what becomes of your loved ones.
In seeking out the authorial intent behind a work of fiction, the two leads are trying
to gain a sense of control in a chaotic universe, the sense that there is indeed an author of
sorts to life, as they do not feel that they are the authors of their own stories, that
they do not have control over their own fates.
And indeed, they do not.
But in this case, letting go of that desire for a sense of control is a part of growing
up, which, ironically, neither of these characters will get to do.
They must mature into adults while never living to become adults.
This is reflective not only of how we consume media and the way media can genuinely touch
and inspire people, but also of a very understandable and human desire to transform that media.
Narratives give us a sense of control in a world that is generally chaotic and unpredictable.
We need narratives to make sense of the world that we live in.
But that does not mean that we have control over the narrative.
The character arcs of both Hazel and Augustus are defined by letting go of that desire for
control of their own narratives, and accepting that life, short though it is, just doesn't
work that way, no matter how much they wish it did.
But, that's just my reading.
Listen, Lindsay, what would it look like if we all listened more?
I don't know, John.
What would it look like?
It would look like a better world, Lindsay.
And listening to audiobooks motivates us, it inspires us, and it can even bring us closer
together.
There is no better place to listen than Audible, because now Audible members get even more
exclusive audio fitness programs, audiobooks, Audible Originals, and more.
Audible has the largest selection of audiobooks on the planet, and now with Audible Originals,
the selection has gotten even more custom, with content made for members.
Host, pick a book to discuss that resonates with your audience.
I recommend Turtles All The Way Down by me.
It's read by Kate Rudd.
She's so good at that job.
Or this one.
This one.
Also narrated by Kate Rudd.
She did a great job.
She did such a good job that they hired her to do this one, too.
You should just get both of them.
It's only two Audible credits.
Yeah.
One of them's free.
Go to audible.com slash lindsayellis.
You can do it with audiobooks.
Start a 30-day trial, and your first audiobook is free.
You can go to audible.com slash lindsayellis.
That's audible.com slash lindsayellis to get your first audiobook free.
Or, or, or, or text lindsayellis to 500-500.
That's Lindsay with an A, Ellis with an E and an I, two L's and an S, to 500-500 and
get your first audiobook free and make it turtles all the way down.
That way Lindsay and I win.
The Fault in Our Stars was a 2012 novel written by Lindsay Ellis.
I did it.
She did a good job.
Yay.
She doesn't get any of the royalties.
I get the credit, apparently.
Yeah, but the money is mine.
