I'm just wondering what the heck is in our water supply.
What the heck is in our oxygen supply of the metallic
oxide salts that create a rainbow effect in a sprinkler?
What is oozing out of our ground that allows this
type of effect to happen?
Not just around our sun and our moon anymore.
Everywhere we look, the visible spectrum is rainbows.
This cannot be natural.
If proof was ever needed of a government conspiracy,
then this rainbow in a sprinkler is surely it.
After all, the authorities claim they're spending money
on science education in schools, but this video shows
that in fact the government is conspiring to suck
the intelligence out of people who should have at least
got a basic understanding of science in elementary school.
The title at the opening of this creepy sprinkler video
gives an alternative explanation.
Rainbows are caused by something called HAARP.
It's basically a phased array radar that sends up to
3.6 megawatts of electromagnetic radiation into the ionosphere,
which heats it up over a narrow range.
What makes this a godsend for conspiracy theorists
is that the research may have a military application.
The theory is that by sending radio waves through the ionosphere,
what gets bounced back will be longer wavelength radiation
that can act like ground-penetrating radar.
But the fact that it's a secret installation run by the military
sending invisible beams into space and then into the Earth,
well, that's enough to excite any conspiracy theorist.
Now, the top secret government project that can destroy the world.
So every pet conspiracy theory from hurricanes to mind control,
and of course rainbow after rainbow after rainbow,
has now been attacked to HAARP.
Back at his war room, the governor meets with his elite team
of investigators, researchers and operatives,
all of them itching to get on the case.
Here's Jesse Ventura investigating HAARP's triggering
of the 2010 Boxing Day tsunami that hit large parts of South East Asia.
This photo was actually taken just before the big tsunami
hit the coast of Indonesia.
What we're seeing is the aurora borealis or the northern lights.
They occur anytime there's any sort of electromagnetic occurrence
in the ionosphere, and they say that when they turn HAARP on,
the colours get really wild up there.
There's no need for dramatic music or speculation about secret conspiracies.
Researchers working at HAARP are quite open about the fact that HAARP
does excite charged particles in the upper atmosphere,
and that produces colours in the sky.
You can even read about these experiments in published papers,
where the physics is explained.
But portraying this as some kind of discovery allows Jesse Ventura
to enter the wild world of speculation,
and wonder what else HAARP might be secretly doing.
His elite investigator, Rahim, tells us this photo of the aurora borealis
is evidence of a link between HAARP and the tsunami of Boxing Day 2010,
because the photo was taken just before the tsunami struck.
This photo was actually taken just before the big tsunami hit the coast of Indonesia.
When exactly? We don't know. Who took it? Don't know that either.
So how do we know it was taken just before the tsunami?
Of course, conspiracy theorists will tell me I'm naive to be so sceptical.
Why am I so resistant to the idea that this aurora happened
when Jesse Ventura's investigation says it happened,
and that it has some connection to the tsunami?
Well, I'll tell you why.
Because before I'm gullible enough to believe some spectacular claim I hear on TV,
I have the sense to check it,
and in this case it meant taking the conspiracy show logo off the bottom of the photo
and doing a search for it on Google Images.
And presto, I discovered exactly the same photo on sale for $24
at Dave Miller's Posters Wanted website.
Not only is there no indication that this commercial picture was taken before,
or even in the same decade as the tsunami, it's not even in the same hemisphere.
Rahim says this is the Aurora Borealis, the Northern Lights.
In fact, it's advertised as the Aurora Australis, the Southern Lights.
So the photo that's supposed to show how a military death machine was activated
just before a major earthquake has in fact been lifted off the internet for $24
by Jesse Ventura's team of elite investigators.
The other thing that's interesting before the tsunami
was that there were no pre-tremors or any warning. It just happened.
Now, I'm not an elite investigator,
and I don't have the resources of Jesse Ventura's elite investigation team,
but it took me just a few minutes to check this claim that the tsunami just happened
and wasn't preceded by an earthquake.
Here, for example, is a seismological record of the supposedly non-existent earthquake,
and here are some scientific papers detailing the mechanism of the earthquake.
So where did elite investigator June Sarpong go wrong,
apart from not checking publicly available records?
I think she probably heard interviews with survivors who said
they hadn't felt an earthquake before the tsunami hit,
so she simply assumed there wasn't one.
A shame she didn't talk to a seismologist who could have told her
that tsunami are often experienced over a much wider area
than the earthquake that causes them.
In 1960, for example, there was a devastating tsunami
that destroyed downtown Hilo in Hawaii and killed 61 people,
but no one felt any tremor.
The same tsunami killed 138 people in Japan,
and again there was no warning tremor.
That's because the earthquake happened in Chile, on the other side of the Pacific.
So while people close to the origins of tsunami do feel an earthquake,
especially if they're standing on soft ground or in tall buildings,
people living far away don't.
But clearly there's no time for the elite team to check any of these facts.
The conspiracy theory has already moved on.
How often are the Northern Lights spotted in Indonesia?
Why would we want to cause a tsunami and kill thousands of Indonesian people?
Alex, maybe they didn't want to.
Maybe they were just experimenting with the thing.
They put it up too high and this was the end result.
What do you think they're going to do after it happens?
Then come out and say, oops, we made a mistake and fess up to it?
Yeah, Alex.
Think about it, they're testing a whole new technology.
But notice what's happened.
In the space of just a few minutes we've jumped from the question of
whether HAARP caused the tsunami to why HAARP caused the tsunami,
even though on the first question we haven't been given one shred of evidence
apart from the fabricated description of a photo that came from a commercial poster company
and June's erroneous assumption about the link between tsunami and seismic tremors.
The science and the evidence, well, they're just nitpicky details.
Fact checking is boring.
Conspiracy theories are all about uncovering the big picture.
From the war room.
Of course, HAARP has now been tied with that other great conspiracy of the 21st century,
so-called chemtrails.
The theory is that the government is spraying something over the skies
and it's doing something to us or the environment.
The problem for me is that chemtrails seem to be completely indistinguishable from contrails,
particles of ice that form from water vapour released by aircraft engines.
Conspiracy theories say they're different.
The chemtrails linger in the atmosphere, whereas contrails don't.
Well, it's a pretty undefined and wussy definition.
But speaking qualitatively, contrails have been doing what they do
ever since planes flew the stratosphere.
Fire and fire into the lifeless stratosphere,
until the exhaust of the engines mixing with the cold thin air condenses
and streams the heavens with paper trails.
But just as I was despairing of finding any evidence that these are anything other than condensation trails,
suddenly I find it.
Secret film from inside the cockpit of one of these chemtrail spraying jets.
What a lucky break.
Well, there you go.
If you're a sceptic, you'll want to know where and when the footage was taken,
why the camera suddenly shifts position from the back of the cockpit
to the lap of whoever's slowly flipping the switch,
and why the word chemtrail has been written on sticky tape and plastered over a switch,
in what any aviator will recognise as the console controlling lighting
for the primary flight and navigation displays.
If you're a conspiracy theorist, this footage will no doubt excite you
with clear evidence of deliberate chemical spraying.
The term conspiracy theory was first coined in the 1960s
to describe a theory that Lee Harvey Oswald didn't act alone
when he assassinated President Kennedy.
It was called a conspiracy to distinguish itself from a one-man operation.
These days, the term is applied to just about anything that may or may not be going on in secret,
which is a pretty broad brush.
Don't forget Watergate.
Yes, OK, look, I'm not denying that things go on in secret,
if that's now the definition of a conspiracy.
But let's take Watergate as a prime example.
It took months of solid investigation to tie President Nixon to the Watergate cover-up.
The Washington Post, where the story was first broken,
insisted on getting every fact checked and confirmed by separate sources.
These days, a conspiracy theory takes as long to prove as it takes to type into a blog.
When the Princess of Wales was killed in 1997,
I went straight to the computer and searched the words Diana and conspiracy,
and on the day of her death, there were already dozens of conspiracy theories
claiming she had been murdered,
based on the fact that the ambulance carrying her travelled very slowly
and it didn't take her to the nearest hospital.
But jumping so quickly to a conspiracy theory leaves no time to answer the question,
why did the ambulance travel so slowly and not go to the nearest hospital?
Of course, there is an explanation, and you'll find it in the video description,
but once a conspiracy theory has been cobbled together
on the basis of whatever sparse information is available in the first few hours, it sticks.
It seems impossible for conspiracy theorists to accept that it was wrong.
Likewise, just hours after thousands of private emails were leaked from the University of East Anglia,
a conspiracy theory had formed before anyone had time to read them all, let alone understand them.
Some of these alleged emails may actually hold the key or actually the clues
to prove that the theory of global warming is a huge conspiracy.
For example, there is one email coming from one scientist,
and in this alleged email, the scientist claims that he had to use additional data
in order to hide the decline of global temperatures.
Of course, that turned out to be complete nonsense,
and we now know the email wasn't claiming anything of the sort.
These hastily drawn conclusions try to adopt the veneer of a real investigation like Watergate the easy way
by simply adding the suffix gate to the conspiracy.
And of course, copy Watergate jargon.
Now of course, in the Watergate investigation,
follow the money meant trace the source of the money paid to the Watergate burglars.
By backtracking checks and funds, the trail led to the committee to re-elect the president,
and it gave reporters Woodward and Bernstein the evidence they needed
to show a link between the burglars and the White House.
Conspiracy theorists have stuck the phrase to their own brand of investigative reporting,
which is to simply show that money paid to researchers comes from research grants.
Wow, well done!
This astonishing discovery can be applied to, well, just about anyone engaged in scientific research.
The implication is that researchers will discover whatever the government wants them to discover.
Well, there are a few things I don't get about this conspiracy theory.
Scientists doing basic research are the cream of their profession,
PhDs who could command high salaries if they worked in industry.
They don't get paid much for working in university research.
In my experience, they do it because they love discovering new things,
and for most of them, a goal is to make a groundbreaking discovery and perhaps win a Nobel Prize.
Well, you're not going to do that by fabricating your data in order to get the same results as everyone else.
Fabricating results means you risk getting kicked out of your job
and losing all credibility in your profession.
The accolades in science go to overturning the conventional wisdom, not confirming it.
And in the case of climate research, where the mantra follow the money is most often applied,
if climate researchers are faking their results to please the government,
why didn't American scientists under George Bush Sr. and Canadian scientists under the current government
start pouring out papers showing there's no link between CO2 and global temperature?
After all, both administrations were and are hostile to action on climate change
and would love to get supporting evidence from the scientific community.
But if this makes no sense to you, then there's another theory to explain
why the research continues to show a link between CO2 and global temperatures.
Apparently, climate scientists want to install a world Marxist government run by the UN.
You know, the New World Order. And climate scientists aren't the only ones.
Evolution is also the foundation philosophy for the New World Order.
Evil men have already divided up the world into regions,
and they've got it all planned. They want to rule the world.
Their goal is to reduce the population to a half billion,
with a few of them as the elite get to rule the world.
Of course, a conspiracy theory is never ever wrong.
So when real evidence comes along to dispute it, the only way out is to claim fraud.
And if the evidence has been confirmed by other researchers,
then they must be in on the conspiracy too.
And if their research has been peer reviewed,
then the peer reviewers must be part of the conspiracy
and the scientific journals that publish the research papers.
And if public inquiries find no evidence of fraud or fabrication,
then of course they must all be in on the conspiracy.
That's why a conspiracy theory can never ever be wrong.
The number of conspirators simply expands to accommodate it.
If you want to study some of the conspiracies, if you get into that kind of stuff,
there have been numerous conspiracies.
Get the Medusa file, or the American conspiracy,
New American magazine, the conspiracy, to see what's really happening.
Many folks are convinced the government was involved
in taking down the building in Oklahoma City.
And same thing with the Twin Tower bombing.
Where were all the other security cameras aimed?
We were sent some photographs that were taken apparently right after the event.
We also had a report about a gas station
whose video camera was pointed in the exact direction
where the 757 would have hit the Pentagon.
Shortly after the event, it was reported that federal officials
showed up at that gas station and confiscated that footage.
If someone like Pothola54 were to do a 9-11 conspiracy debunk video
as convincingly as he did at debunking ancient aliens,
I would be forced to pause and reconsider.
Thanks, I'm flattered, but why should I debunk this
when I'm sure you're perfectly capable of debunking it yourself?
As I've said before, I'm not doing anything brilliant or extraordinary in my videos,
simply verifying claims by checking sources, which anyone can do.
If you watch any of the videos or you've been unfortunate enough
to be cornered by one of these 9-11 conspiracy theorists at a party
and have had your ear chewed off for over an hour about all the evidence,
you'll know that it's all based on quotes from people who believe they heard a bomb,
people who believe they saw a missile,
people who feel there's something in one of the photos or missing from the photos,
or who feel that buildings and airlines shouldn't have acted the way they did.
Conspiracy theorists insist that all these unsourced reports
and assumptions and speculation raise questions, to which I say, great.
Then do what real investigative reporters do,
put your coat on and go and find the answers.
Real conspiracies have been uncovered by answering questions,
not by sitting in front of a computer screen and wondering why something looks or feels wrong.
Just say, hey, no smoking in here, what do you want?
You know, I'm about to talk about this whole, you know, microchipping.
Microchipping? What?
Obamacare and...
OK, can you go away and put a shirt on?
Here's one of the websites that got the shirtless smoker so agitated.
It's about a microchip, widely reported in the media,
that can hold important health data on individuals who suffer from debilitating illness.
But nowhere does it give any evidence that Americans will be forcibly implanted with microchips,
and on the basis of this essay filled with rumour and belief, the shirtless smoker believes it too.
And so does the preacher who's about to go, what?
What? Are we talking about a microchip that they want to put in your hand?
Folks, it's already the law of the land. It was passed in the Obamacare bill.
It was? Does anyone have the relevant passage in the bill?
Yes, this is the passage they all refer to.
But of course it doesn't say that all Americans have to be microchipped at all.
It mandates the establishment of a national registry of people who have implantable devices,
such as pacemakers, to monitor safety and outcomes.
But so certain are the conspiracy theorists that they must be right
that they even put a date by which all Americans would be forcibly microchipped.
March 23rd, 2013.
Whoops.
But let's bring all this bang up to date.
I had a small bet with myself that even the Boston Marathon bombing would by now have spawned its own conspiracy,
and sure enough it has.
It comes courtesy of the Russian government's channel Russia Today,
and we know how reliable they are when it comes to checking facts.
These days you'll find a conspiracy theory surrounding any event almost as soon as it happens,
and if you're not convinced by the sparse and speculative evidence provided,
the conspiracy theorist will resort to a common fallback position.
You don't think this is possible? Seriously?
You trust the government? You think big business is working in your interests?
Well, yeah, conspiracies exist. Come on.
Yes, they do. But murders also exist.
It doesn't mean everyone who comes to your door is a murderer.
Do I trust the government? No.
The difference between you and me is that I don't trust the information I see in internet blogs or videos either.
I look for their sources, if they have any, and check them.
Unlike you, I want to know the answers to questions, not treat questions as if they were answers.
Unlike you, I don't swallow unverified claims,
or form instant conclusions based on nothing more than hearsay, feelings, beliefs, ifs and maybes.
That doesn't make me smarter than you or any better educated,
but it does mean I'm more sceptical and far less gullible.
We all know it wasn't something that happened 20 years ago, but now it's happening now.
