And as the first woman to win album of the year at the Grammys twice, I want to say to
all the young women out there…
Some of the more cynical feminists out there have suggested that Taylor's Grammy was
not so much a victory for all women as a victory for Taylor Swift, and that this version of
feminism is really just like upper-class white women congratulating themselves for how much
wealth and power they have.
Now I, on the other hand…
Huh.
Well, anyway, the important question is, what would a Taylor Swift song sound like covered
by Bob Dylan?
I knew you were trouble when you walked in So shame on me now, fool me to places I've
never been Till you put me down, oh I knew you were
trouble when you walked in So shame on me now, fool me to places I've
never been Now I'm lying on the cold hard ground
Trouble, trouble, trouble Trouble, trouble, trouble
What was God thinking when he designed drugs?
He said, this one will make you alert and awake, but anxious, and you'll have to take
a shit, because fuck you.
When people who are angry about feminism find out that I'm not angry about feminism, they
often present me with evidence of feminists doing something stupid, and then they want
to know, what do I think of that, huh?
And it's hard, because it's not easy to respond to that kind of accusation without
sounding like you're committing some kind of no-true feminist fallacy.
Though it's extremely easy for any asshole with an internet connection to send you a
video of a blue-haired woman saying she hates men.
Haha!
Feminism exposed!
But why is there so much bad feminism in the first place?
Well, one reason is that feminism has gotten so big in the last decade that everyone seems
to want to get in on it, leading us to a situation where much of what goes on under the heading
of feminism is just plain nonsense.
In the current year, female mega-millionaires can draw praise for presenting their own personal
success stories as parables about the global empowerment of all womankind, and corporate
marketing has discovered that attaching heartwarming girl-power babble to a brand can attract an
extra kick of publicity from writers of feminist blogs.
If I asked you to run like a girl now, would you do it differently?
I would run like myself.
Would you like a chance to redo it?
Yeah.
My god.
I am ravenous!
I want support for ugly girls and lazy girls and girls that can't ever get their eyeliner
right.
Well, good on them, I guess, for saying ugly girls, instead of disingenuinely insisting
that everyone is beautiful.
You mean disingenuously, not disingenuinely, you dumb idiot!
Wretch feminists destroyed!
But should we really be celebrating laziness and incompetence?
If we support people who can't get their eyeliner right, like me in this video, how
are they ever supposed to learn and improve?
We need shame.
Shame!
Let's ban Fosse.
Be brave.
Be you.
Ban Fosse.
No!
If we ban Fosse, then women will end up just like men, and men are fucking assholes.
I hate men!
Seriously, though, some of the feminist advice given to women is borderline psychopathic.
You know, like, never take no for an answer.
Always take what you want.
This is like rapist advice!
And I get that this is an attempt to turn women into monsters so they can survive in
a monstrous world, but if feminism is genuine social activism instead of just individual
lessons in how to game the corporate shark tank to your advantage, wouldn't it be better
to advocate for a softer, more effeminate world where it's okay to apologize and to
care about other people?
I feel like there's a misogynistic strain in some feminism that resents femininity and
wants women to be more like men.
But I like women the way they are, goddammit!
We shouldn't be trying to turn women into men.
What we should be doing is trying to turn men into women.
Beautiful.
Perfect.
Angels.
Hairless.

Now, if I wanted to, I could probably make an entire career out of complaining about
the things in feminism I don't like.
I'd certainly attract a larger audience and probably more money, but there are already
so many assholes complaining about feminism that I just can't bring myself to do it.
I don't want to be mistaken for one of those, and honestly I don't think it would do any
good for me to do that anyway.
You know, it's one thing when a young woman criticizes the stupid things her peers are
doing on Tumblr or whatever, when you've got like 49-year-old men ranting about the
shit 19-year-old girls are doing, I don't know, I just get kind of a creepy vibe from
it.
It reminds me of when adult men used to complain about Justin Bieber all the time.
Like why do you care so much what music female babies listen to anyway?
I still hear the nasal voices of those invisibles serenading her.
People with names like Sammy and Joe, Eddie and Tony, and Peggy and Guy and Patty and
Rex, and sentimental song hits, all of them as similar to my ear as her various candies
were to my palate.
Ah geez.
Now, one serious problem with junk food feminism is that it potentially distracts from more
substantive feminist activism.
But it's only a distraction to the extent you allow yourself to be distracted by it.
And of course the shitlords of YouTube have every interest in keeping the worst of feminism
in the spotlight.
I know to my ideological opponents it might sound weird for me to say that I'm a feminist
even though I believe a lot of feminism is garbage, but what you have to understand is
that feminism has gotten so huge and so ubiquitous that it's come to resemble the whole of human
life, which is to say that 95% of it is absolute fucking shit, which should come as no surprise.
I mean, 95% of music is shit, 95% of movies are shit, and 99.999% of YouTube videos are
shit.
The Earth itself is mostly shit.
It's like shitty deserts and open oceans and cold ass tundras and hot fucking mosquito
rainforests, and there's like plagues of locusts and dinosaurs tearing zebras apart, and the
whole planet is adrift in a cosmos that's 99.9% forever empty, and most of the parts
that aren't empty are bad and violent and shitty.
And all of this is really just a metaphor for the human soul, which spends most of its
time waiting in line, looking at the clock, in traffic, bored, anxious, envious, insecure,
broke, lonely, sick, hungover, aging, working, waiting for the person you have a crush on
to text you back and thinking they definitely hate you, 9-11, vomiting, waiting to text
your crush back because you don't want them to think you like them as much as you do,
begging for forgiveness, drying your iPhone, watching insects die because of the horrible
chemicals you sprayed on them, wretched, creepy, lust, longing for childhood joys that can
never be regained, the encroaching death of passion that slowly rots your marriage, the
fucking Delaware Turnpike, cancer, joyless intoxication, and whatever music it is they
play at fucking CVS.
It's all kind of a bunch of shit, which is why the meaning of life is to seek out the
little moments of ecstasy and redemption that make it all worthwhile, and to try each day
to see the world as interesting and beautiful and strange, or at least it finds it all kind
of funny.
At least, that's the best thing I've been able to come up with.
What's your fucking idea?
If you liked this video, you can follow me in the usual places, and now on Facebook too.
I want to thank all my new patrons for helping to make this video possible.
I have more ideas for videos and time or money to make them, so the more support I get, the
more I can do with this channel.
Each new pledge is a triumph for every single woman on the face of God's grey earth.
Namaste.
Namaste.
