1066. The start of the royal family on these fair isles.
Well, there were kings in many countries before that, and druids before that, and Pangaea before that,
but we have to start somewhere, and a millennia ago is plenty far.
If that leaves out Æthelred the Unready, so it goes.
William the Conqueror conquered in the Norman Conquest,
Norman here being code for French.
Because it's the olden days, people had lots of kids, but to keep things simple,
this family tree is going to leave out many of them on each branch, because not every child matters.
So William had three kids we care about, William II, Henry I, and Adela.
If you've seen the video about royal succession, click here if you haven't,
you'll know that formal rules for passing on the crown will get established,
but for now, it's a free-for-all home team advantage to the eldest son.
But never forget, bigger army diplomacy.
Upon William the Conqueror's death, William II became king.
William II didn't marry, and on a bro's day out with Henry,
died in a hunting accident that gave Henry I the crown.
Henry I had at least 26 children, of which only two were 100% legit.
He declared his daughter would rule next, after his son died in a shipwreck,
and swore his knights to honor Empress Matilda by crossing their hearts, hoping to die,
sticking a needle in their eye.
But, when Henry I died while Matilda was in France,
many ignored this while her cousin, Stephen, raced to Westminster,
using faster army diplomacy to get coronated first.
Empress Matilda did eventually return, and start a decades-long civil war
that was pretty much a stalemate, because turtling in the 1100s was an effective RTS tactic.
While she did rule part of the island, as Matilda never had an official coronation,
her monarchal status is disputed.
Now, as Stephen's children were either dead, disinterested, or a nun,
his crown went to his nephew, Henry II, who had four sons,
Henry the Young, Richard the Lionheart, King John, and... Jeff.
Guess who died before his turn?
Henry II saw the history thus far of conquering, assassination, maybe,
usurpation, attritional war, and decided, waiting until after the death of the current king,
before sorting out the next king, didn't work.
So Henry II changed the system, and crowned Henry the Young,
co-king with him, invoking the rule of two.
One is none.
Two is one.
Important, you need a backup.
It was a good plan for stability, helped by the young king's popularity,
but unfortunately, the apprentice rebelled against the master,
rallying his brothers, which resulted in another civil war of disputed monarchs,
during which Henry the Young died of dysentery, Henry the Elder died of fever,
and Richard I took the crown.
After Richard came John, and four eldest sons' successions in a row.
John to Henry III, insert Magna Carta here, to Edward I,
Longshanks to Edward II, to Edward III.
Actually, Ed II was overthrown by Isabelle of France,
AKA the She-Wolf of France, AKA his wife.
After deposing her husband, she acted as regent for their son.
Every one of these arrows glosses over a bit of complexity.
Edward III had five sons, Edward the Black Prince,
Lionel, John, Edmund, and Thomas, none of which would wear the crown.
When Edward III died, his throne would have gone to the Black Prince,
but he was dead at the time, so the crown went to his boringly named son Richard,
now the Second.
There's a bunch of drama-lama stuff around Richard II,
which your English teacher might force you to read about,
but spoiler alert, history's ending is always the same.
Bigger army diplomacy.
This time from Henry IV, who gets the crown,
and Richard II gets starvation in captivity.
Another Henry before we get to the War of the Roses,
a war that strikes terror and boredom
in the minds of students of history the nation over,
who have to deal with this family tree, simplified,
to explain why everyone was angry.
But the shortest version ever is Edward III's great-great-grandsons duked it out,
even though one of them was dead for part of the fight,
but we can't get into that now,
so Henry VI to Edward IV, to Henry VI to Edward IV, the end.
Edward IV, on his deathbed, left his crown to his son,
but being 12, he needed protection,
so Richard, his bestest uncle in the world,
promised to take super good care of him.
Edward V then promptly disappeared under suspicious circumstances
that left Richard to become Richard III.
But he didn't stay king for long,
because Edward III's great-great-great-great-grandson Henry VII
took the crown, put a ring on Elizabeth of York
to lock down that royal legitimacy,
and then sired Henry VIII, splitter of churches and ladies.
Henry VIII thought it was high time
to formalize the rules of inheritance,
so he wrote them out in his will,
basically saying, oldest boys first, girls,
only if there aren't any boys,
and parliament approved the rules,
which should have made everything neat and tidy,
but were about to enter the really messy time,
because Henry's son lived just long enough to screw it up,
inheriting the throne at nine.
There was, of course, a scheming protector
at running things, yet he still declared at 15
that his father's rules were dumb,
and his sisters were dumb,
and that his first cousin once removed, Lady Jane Grey,
should be the next monarch instead.
Then he died, and Lady Jane Grey became queen at sweet 16,
sort of, in a disputed status way, for nine days,
until beheaded by Mary,
the first really truly officially nobody-doubts-it queen.
Mary didn't have any kids,
and passed the crown to Elizabeth I,
who became the second queen in a row
to also not have children, but no problem,
because Lady Jane Grey was next in, oh, right.
Now, this is the point at which we acknowledge
Scotland exists.
They'd been doing their own royal thing,
which, for our purposes, joins the English branch,
where Edward III's great-granddaughter married into it
in the 1400s, and then goes James, James, James,
James, James, Mary, Queen of Scots, James,
bringing us back to the 1600s.
Henry VIII's sister, importantly,
also married into this line of the family,
giving it English legitimacy points
in the eyes of the English Parliament,
which asked to borrow Scotland's James,
making him king of two countries,
with two numbers in his name,
depending on where you're counting from.
James had a son, Charles I,
and you might think this unification of the monarchs
means the very messy time is over,
but no, because Cromwell.
Cromwell didn't like kings,
and beheaded Charles I, declaring no royals no longer,
making himself the Lord Protector,
which was in no way like a king,
even though he was in charge,
and it was a hereditary office passed to his son.
But the Cromwells didn't last,
mainly because his son was a fancy country squire
who didn't follow Rule Zero, keep the army happy,
giving Charles' son, Charles II,
the ability to re-establish the monarchy.
Charles II had lots of children,
all of which were illegitimate,
leaving his brother, James II, next in line.
But James II was Catholic,
and ever since Henry split the church,
Catholics had terrible approval ratings.
But conveniently, he had nice Protestant daughters,
one married to a Dutch prince,
who by the nature of these things
was the grandson of Charles I.
Bonus English legitimacy points,
plus who doesn't like the Dutch?
With James so unpopular and William and Mary so popular,
the army and nobles pretty much invited
the royal couple to invade, and James II fled.
William and Mary ruled as co-monarchs,
but without children, the crown went to Queen Anne,
who also didn't produce any heirs,
though not from lack of effort.
She was pregnant 17 times.
Again, finding themselves
with a no-royals-no-longer situation,
Parliament decided it was really truly seriously
the time to sort out the rules of inheritance,
to avoid pretenders from every branch
of this messy tree fighting over the crown.
Parliament did a royal reboot to clear the cruft,
defining Sophia of Hanover,
the granddaughter of James' dual numbers,
to be the new starting point for all claims to the crown.
These rules finally stuck, thus ending the very messy time.
George I, son of Sophia,
was the first king under the new rules,
then his son George II to George III,
and even though he lost America and his mind,
never fear, the rules are here,
so the crown continued to calmly descend the family tree,
going to George IV, who didn't have any surviving children,
to William IV, who had 10 children, all illegitimate,
then passing through his dead younger brother
to Queen Victoria, who started her reign in 1837
and made it to just over the finishing line
of the 20th century,
which is a doubly impressively long time,
given the state of medical technology then.
After the end of her age,
the crown went to her son, Edward VII,
to George V, to Edward VIII,
who finally breaks up this neat and tidy
and somewhat boring line of succession
by committing a scandal, marrying a commoner,
an American commoner,
an American commoner divorcee, twice over.
Actually, the divorces were a real problem
and weren't compatible with the monarch's role
as head of state and also the Church of England
in the 1930s.
Edward abdicated to his brother, George VI,
who was reluctant to take the crown
and then had to oversee World War II
and the subsequent breakup of the British Empire,
which drained the reluctant king's health,
who died at 56,
leaving the crown to Elizabeth II in 1952
at the age of 25.
Seven years older than Victoria,
her great-great-grandmother was on her coronation day,
but in early September 2015,
Elizabeth became the longest reigning queen
in not just British history, but world history.
From Elizabeth II, the crown continues on to Charles,
the longest heir apparent in British history,
to his son, William, to his son, George.
And that is a brief history of the royal family.
