♪
In June 2000,
Ion Storm released Deus Ex.
Deus Ex is one of the best games ever made.
Its engaging free-form gameplay
and complex storytelling quickly cemented it
as one of the true classics of the medium.
♪
So the developer went bankrupt.
If that line sounds familiar to you,
get used to it. Like, 12 more videos
are gonna start this way.
Eidos Interactive, the game's publisher,
was the 51% shareholder in Ion Storm,
so when the company closed its doors
and the creators quit or got let go,
the Deus Ex intellectual property
didn't belong to any of the people who,
you know, made it,
but to a bunch of executives at a publishing company.
Then Eidos Interactive's parent company,
also named Eidos,
which made researching this very confusing,
got bought and merged with another game publisher,
Sales Curve Interactive.
Then they hit major financial trouble
and realized they need to make games to survive
and opened a new development studio in Canada
which began development on the next Deus Ex game.
While that was happening,
things were going great at SCI.
Just kidding, it went so bad the CEO got fired.
To get a fresh start,
they renamed the company to Eidos.
Hold on a second.
Then they got bought again,
this time by Square Enix.
Square Enix said they were going to leave Eidos
to themselves, then changed their mind
and forcibly merged the company
with their European branch and oh, my God,
isn't the game industry so normal and fine?
While all of that was happening,
the team at Eidos Montreal
had to somehow make a video game.
The making of documentary for this new Deus Ex game
begins with a bunch of talk about how great it is
to work with Eidos from French-Canadian developers
wearing t-shirts with the Eidos branding.
Eidos has a very rich IP portfolio.
I mean, their projects are just great.
Their IPs are very rich.
Partway through, Eidos disappears
from the story completely because they stopped existing
and they suddenly had completely different bosses.
Being owned by Square Enix came with some benefits though.
They got to reference Final Fantasy a few times.
One of the bosses, a big guy with a gun for an arm,
got to be named Barret.
They put a poster on some character's walls
for a Final Fantasy 27, you know,
because it's the future. It's cute.
So it wasn't all bad.
Just kidding. It was bad.
The executives at Square Enix
weren't going to let them do this.
They didn't want to risk damaging
the Final Fantasy brand
any more than Kingdom Hearts already.
The team at Eidos Montreal had to argue their way up
the corporate chain of the business
that just bought them all the way up to Yoichi Wada,
the president and director of the entire company,
to get permission to put a funny poster
in the background of their game.
Deus Ex used to be a series that criticized
the bizarre machinations of corporations
so big no one knows who they're working for,
where intellectual property and brand management
mattered more than people,
a world where one company can own half your childhood,
a system governed more by tax incentives
and corporate subsidies than people.
It asked important questions about the future of mankind,
about who wielded power over others
and what their interests really were,
a story sometimes so accurate in its guesses
it seems less fictitious now than ever.
But then, many years and corporate acquisitions later,
comes Deus Ex Human Revolution,
the game that dares to ask the question,
what if we had robot arms?
♪♪
Deus Ex Human Revolution is pretty good.
It's fun. Yeah.
I have a tendency to make videos about things
I either really love or really hate,
so just to clear up any potential confusion here,
this game is fine. Good job, guys.
I'm about to spend, uh, oh, my God,
complaining about it, but I need to say,
this was the first game by a new studio,
and it was being made while they were being bought out
by Square Enix by a team that had never previously worked
on any games even remotely like Deus Ex.
I might not think the game is perfect,
but it is a genuine achievement that it's this good.
So why am I talking about it then?
That's a good question. Me?
Well, here's the thing.
The original Deus Ex belonged to a special subgenre
of games named the immersive sim.
In a sentence, immersive sims are games
that feel just that little bit more like worlds
you're taking part in.
They prioritized the player's freedom
to choose how to solve problems
and then dealing with the consequences of those choices
and being able to find creative and unexpected solutions,
often ones the developers themselves hadn't thought of,
by being built in a way that could respond well
to player creativity.
There's a lot of different ways
you can define an immersive sim,
but there's only one real one.
Can you solve a problem intended to be solved with a gun
by stacking a bunch of boxes and going over it?
In the late 90s and early 2000s,
immersive sims were coming out fairly often,
and people still look back fondly
on many of those games,
but then almost overnight, they disappeared.
An entire genre of games basically died out for years,
but a couple of years back,
we started to get more of them again,
and they're amazing and beautiful
and a lot like the games that people remember.
Human Revolution is a fascinating orphan of history.
It came out between the two golden ages
of the immersive sim when this type of game
wasn't considered popular or profitable enough,
so while they were making it,
the team made a lot of changes
to try and make it a bit like other games
people liked at the time,
trying to streamline it and make it more accessible
for a console audience.
I'll give you three guesses why they decided
the game needed third-person cover shooting,
and at the time of release,
people seemed happy with its compromises,
but the thing about immersive sims is
they were already great and didn't need changing.
Recent games like the new Prey have proven
immersive sims barely need to change at all
from how they were 20 years ago
to be amazing at what they're trying to do,
so when the Human Revolution team decided
the Deus Ex formula was broken,
all their fixes actually made it less like
what makes these games great,
so today in this year's self-therapy session
masquerading as a video game analysis,
I'll be trying to get to the bottom
of what happened to Deus Ex
to see what we can learn about how
or how not to modernize a classic
because there's a lot more at stake here
than just one beloved franchise.
After doing some digging into the lineage
of the intellectual property rights
of some of my favorite franchises,
I discovered Square Enix might not just be rebooting
slash remaking slash beating the dead horses
of the Deus Ex, Tomb Raider, and Thief properties.
No, a much more important franchise
lives under their jurisdiction,
one of the most important and meaningful stories
in gaming history.
I'm speaking, of course, about Gex.
The Gex trilogy sold millions of copies
and arguably saved the world,
but there hasn't been a new Gex since 1999,
and due to Crystal Dynamics' acquisition
by Eidos in 1998,
Square Enix's 2009 acquisition of the company
that bought Eidos and renamed itself to Eidos
means it's only a matter of time
before Squeenix puts someone to work
reviving the sleeping god in their possession,
so for all our sakes,
it's worth seeing if we can learn from other attempts
to revive old franchises
and come up with some general pointers.
Gex and Deus Ex form a symbiont circle.
What happens to one of them will affect the other.
You must understand this, so we have to do this.
For Gex, if we're not careful,
he'll be in the next Kingdom Hearts
and Kiss, Goofy, and Society will fucking crumble.
♪ ♪
A really good test of role-playing games
is how quickly players get to do that.
In Deus Ex, you press new game,
and then you're making a character.
Then there's an opening cutscene,
and bam, you're at your first mission,
the iconic and impressively open-ended
Liberty Island level.
A huge part of why this game still works so well
is how instantaneously it makes you feel
like you're playing it your own way.
You've only just decided your character's
starting abilities, and already you're being told
to put them to use how you see fit
to capture the NSF leader holed up
in the Statue of Liberty.
Within literally seconds of starting the game,
you're being asked to pick a new weapon
by a character whose appearance changes
based on what your character looks like
because he's your brother.
That's a pretty freeing way to start a game,
giving players a bunch of choices
and already reacting to one they made
in the character creation screen,
but this type of opening isn't unique to Deus Ex though.
It's a staple of the genre.
In, I don't know,
Vampire the Masquerade Bloodlines,
you make a character, cutscene,
funny tutorial that you can skip,
welcome to Santa Monica.
It's just like it is in real life.
The high watermark here, of course,
is Fallout New Vegas,
instantly plopping the character
you just made in the world with next to no limits
where to go and what to do.
Putting the player in the driver's seat
as quickly as possible creates a sense of agency
which is pivotal in games that prioritize
making choices and playing a role.
Role-playing games. What a concept.
-♪ We got to get up ♪
In Deus Ex Human Revolution,
I was a bit worried when I realized
there wasn't anything like a character creation screen,
but hey, I'm old. Maybe those are outdated now.
I did do a little cringe when I saw
the highest difficulty was called
Give Me Deus Ex though.
Sure, tell me to have high expectations.
That hasn't ruined my life before.
♪♪
Is everything in place?
Almost.
What do you mean, almost?
The game begins with the weekly
Illuminati Zoom conference
where they ominously discuss their plans
while trying to change the default profile picture.
Apart from one teeny, tiny, massive problem,
I really like this opening.
I especially like how short it pretends to be.
The intro ends and bam, you are Adam Jensen,
head of security at Sarif Industries.
Oh, it's really thematic if you think about it.
You see, Adam is a clever reference to Seinfeld.
Remember my friend Adam from Detroit?
Yeah, the guy with the dog mantid.
Ah!
I do like that it zooms in on his head to start the game.
I'm glad someone's repping the classics.
Wow, that was pretty quick.
It's time to begin the first level
and start playing the game. Nope.
You see, the problem with the original Deus Ex
was you didn't spend 20 minutes watching J.C. Denton
waddle around his office making small talk first.
The opening cut scene is far from over.
The top scientist at Sarif Industries
is Adam's ex-girlfriend,
but they're still pretty close.
You can tell because they decided to pose her
like a teenage anime school girl.
And I thought women were the ones who kept men waiting.
Oh-ho-ho-ho! Gender!
The introduction isn't one minute
of ominous, interesting dialogue followed by gameplay.
It's followed by many minutes of walking and talking,
meaningless techno babble.
But the increased neural peptides
coming from the PDOC cluster...
That actually happens twice.
I'm thinking the glial tissue breakdown
you noticed after splicing in the repressive protein
might be the cause.
Oh, yeah, this is great.
We might get a more accurate reading...
Da-na-na-na-na-na.
And then you get to watch a weapons demonstration,
argue with your co-workers in the elevator...
Watch the planes go by,
and listen to your boss tell you how important
all that stuff was for the future of the human race
before they realize they're losing you
so, uh, uh, a terrorist attack happens.
There we go. Oh, boy, a call to action.
Now we can finally start the game.
The unskippable tutorial for how to play the game.
We need to make sure you know how to crouch,
move boxes around,
use vents, and take cover.
Click on enemies to shoot them.
Okay, now do it a few more times just in case.
Okay, well, at least it's over
and now we all know how to play
so now we can start the game.
Watch another cut scene.
Adam gets knackered by some bastards.
Then the bad man shoots him into a hospital
where the game transitions
into a really cool opening sequence.
Adam has most of his body replaced
with mechanical parts and the music swells
and, ah, yeah, it's a really cool opening.
And now, finally, after the opening cut scene
and the walk and talk and all this set up
and a tutorial and another cut scene,
the game can start.
Here he is. Here's our boy.
Oh, man, they're doing it again.
Yeah!
Finally, you can play the game.
Start a sequence where Adam comes back into work
to get his heads-up display fixed
by the IT guy on his way to the first mission.
Only then can you go to the helipad
and after another cut scene,
you have a conversation in the aircraft
with your boss about the mission you're headed into
and get to pick a weapon.
The first real choice in the game.
As a reminder, you're making the same choice
literally five seconds into the original Deus Ex.
Give me the GEP gun.
The GEP gun might be useful.
♪♪
That might have been over the line, JC.
I kind of wanted to know how fast the intro could go
if you were going as fast as possible
and skipping everything,
but when I tried that, I hit a little snag.
How quickly can you give me Deus Ex?
Come on, let's do it.
♪♪
Uh, uh, uh, uh, come on.
I want it.
Okay, right.
Oh, you're kidding me.
You can't even skip it?
I went for a piss while I was recording
the intro of the director's cut
and there was still, like, two minutes left of this.
I should have bothered to wash my hands.
Uh, fun fact, the Human Revolution
speedrunning community have a shared save file
that starts right after the walk and talk
because holy shit, can you imagine
having to sit through that every time?
Oh, my God, I can't even close the game
to stop the experiment.
It just goes to this screen.
You can't even open the menu.
Alt-F4?
Okay, you can at least go it that way.
♪♪
It crashed. It's fucking crashed.
Now, I get what they're going for.
Games with a more linear cinematic intent
like Red Dead Redemption or The Last of Us
or even Half-Life bring you into the narrative
by slowly building to their gameplay like this,
but for RPGs with a focus on player freedom and choice,
this is the opposite of what you should do.
The player doesn't feel like they're taking part
in the story when they can barely control
where Adam aims his head for most of his big introduction.
For games like Deus Ex,
which Human Revolution says it's trying to give people,
you want the player to have a sense of control
as soon as possible.
Once it's over, though,
everything really picks up,
so it's not that big a deal,
but if it's not a big deal, then why did I waste
so much time complaining about it?
Well, first of all, leave me alone.
It's my video. I can do what I want.
And secondly, I think this choice reflects
a pretty serious misunderstanding
about what makes these games fun to play.
You see, this is an exact mistake
the original game almost made too.
See? I'm going somewhere with this.
Please subscribe.
They originally planned to begin
with meeting all of your coworkers in your base,
talking to everyone,
a lot of exposition and setup and introductions,
basically a lot of busy work
that wouldn't be that fun to do first thing
the instant you hit new game.
Before there was an attack on UNATCO HQ
that necessitated going into action.
In other words, they had the same idea
as the people who made Human Revolution,
but they later realized it would be better
if they started with gameplay
and deliberately switched the order.
This introduces a minor weird plot thing.
You arrive on an island to deal with a terrorist attack
and it's right next to where your new base happens to be.
This would have made slightly more sense
when you started at the base
and went out when they attacked headquarters,
which is how it seemed to work in original footage
from betas of the game,
but it was worth it to make this change
because the player feels like a part of the story now,
which is, you know, the goal of role-playing games.
You don't feel like a part of the story
by watching the character do things.
You feel that way by getting to do things as the character,
and there's a big difference there.
I don't like giving direct advice
like I know the exact correct way to make a game,
but guys, start the game here.
Start at the thing or in the plane
on the way to the thing.
The next game, Mankind Divided,
did exactly that. You start on the plane.
I mean, it had three more opening sequences
after it for some reason.
More importantly than any of this though,
we need to circle back to the most fascinating part
of this whole thing.
Deus Ex Human Revolution
recreated an exact problem
the original game almost had
and then fixed during development.
I think we need to explore how something like that
can happen, right?
♪♪
So the development of Human Revolution
was a bit of a mess.
I mean, first off, this was a new studio
making their first game.
You can't just snap your fingers
and open a new 350-person development studio overnight.
You have to build that, you know?
And in this case, literally.
When the studio opened, the building they planned
to make their offices wasn't even finished being built.
These guys left everything to come to a brand new studio
with not even permanent offices yet.
Building a new studio can't be easy.
Now, you're clever, so you're probably wondering
why so many game companies open studios in Montreal.
I'm sure French-Canadians make for excellent game designers,
but the answer is money.
Here's the annual cost of hiring
a video game programmer in various major cities.
San Francisco, $119,404.
Austin, where Deus Ex was developed, $91,161.
Vancouver, $78,500.
Toronto's almost at $78,000.
They're getting there. Montreal, $72,335.
Montreal with government tax credit, $45,209.
Up to 37.5% of the cost of your employees' salaries
are effectively given back to you by the province.
Look, all I'm saying is I can telepathically predict
where companies will open their next game studio.
Don't believe me? It's all in the numbers.
What, were EIDA supposed to open
a new studio in Texas again?
The biggest game studio headquartered in Texas now
is, I think, Gearbox, right?
And guess where they're opening their new studio?
Come to work at Gearbox Quebec.
They don't pay very well,
but they promise really good bonuses.
I mean, they promise them.
EIDAS Montreal also had to deal with the fact
that they're the Canadian branch
of a company that doesn't exist.
They got acquired by another company
while they were trying to make their first game.
That's got to make the development process
a little more complicated.
It's, uh, it's, uh, two years or more of development.
You never know how it's gonna turn out.
It's easy to see why some aspects
of the process got misplaced.
Okay, I don't want to make any more excuses
for the developers.
It's starting to feel a bit condescending.
Let's talk about some of the choices
the developers made about how to design this game.
In a hugely informative Game Developers Conference talk
about the development of Human Revolution,
gameplay director Francois Lapikus,
sorry if I'm pronouncing that wrong,
my Quebecois, Quebeci, Quebeci?
My Canadian French isn't great,
says during pre-production,
the team planned the entire game
and all of its features and mechanics in advance
and then stuck to that plan throughout development,
executing all of it with very few changes.
Uh, we did not redo systems.
Uh, we did not rethink the game.
We just went full speed ahead.
We knew exactly what we wanted this game to be,
what we wanted the player to feel.
Having a plan makes sense,
but traditionally in game development,
plans change over time as you see your game ideas in action
and iterate and make changes.
Human Revolution's main design team
wrote all their initial ideas on huge sheets of paper
and then stuck them to the walls
and followed them religiously.
Everything I've shown you so far,
we put on huge sheets of paper
which we papered the walls over with.
Before they'd actually made the game,
had a chance to see how it felt to play or test things out,
they'd already decided how almost everything
was going to be.
So by having it, uh, on walls,
every single morning when we came in,
we saw exactly what we needed to do.
They were so important in fact
that when we moved to our, uh, final offices,
it's the first thing we put up.
By the end, the team had made a game
that was absolutely brilliant...
on paper.
When I say Human Revolution feels like
the first few ideas a bunch of guys had
in a brainstorming session right at the start of development,
that's because it is the first few ideas
a bunch of guys had in a brainstorming session
right at the start of development.
Basically the whole game...
Ha ha ha.
Blueprint was a way for us
to chart the whole game in advance.
Just to show you this is, uh, half of the blueprint.
Basically the whole game had been planned out
on spreadsheets before they'd discovered,
you know, some of it is boring and time consuming,
and then they realized they'd forgotten
to plan half the stuff that needed to be there
and had to add major components to the game
at the last minute and everybody hated them.
Lapikus apologizes directly in his talk for the boss fights.
They were a big part of the game
and we should have put more efforts in them
so truly sorry about that.
While I was watching this talk,
I was beginning to write a joke in my notebook
like I guess no one wrote about the boss fights on the walls
but it turns out that actually happened.
Remember the directions sheets?
I was talking about at the beginning.
We didn't have one for boss fights.
We kind of forgot about it
because we didn't have these direction sheets.
We didn't really know what we were doing with boss fights.
Game development is a complicated process
where initial ideas you had in a vacuum months ago
might turn out not to work in practice.
Just as a comparison,
the team behind the original Deus Ex
threw away half of their design document
part way through.
We ended up with,
are you sitting down,
500 pages of documentation?
Yeah.
No one read it.
Um...
Warren Spector, the director of the first game,
is really open about how much rethinking
needed to be done to make the game what it is
even though they thought they knew everything
they needed at the end of pre-production.
The year Deus Ex came out,
he wrote a retrospective for Gamasutra
which incidentally changed its name to game developer
while I was writing this video which was confusing
and part of it covers just how much of their ideas
got thrown out or replaced.
That knowledge allowed us to go through
our 500-page design documents
and cut everything that was extraneous,
winnowing it down to a svelte 270 pages.
Less game, not at all.
What was left was the best 270 pages,
the stuff that worked.
We were open to change, be open to change.
Anybody who tells you that, you know,
when you get to the end of pre-production,
you've got a script and nothing changes
has never made a game, right?
Blueprint was a way for us
to chart the whole game in advance.
On the one hand,
you have a game that appears to have been designed
pretty intensively before they'd even made any of it
and on the other, you have a team months from release
who realize there's a problem and go,
wait, hold on a second.
Like me and Warren and Chris would sit in a room
and fight like cats and dogs.
It's just kind of weird
that you introduce some of these characters,
you interact with them a little bit
and then they're just gone.
He shows up in mission one, he shows up in mission two,
he shows up in mission four
and then you never hear from him again.
What happened to that guy?
And it was a powerful question
because it was one of the basics of storytelling
that we as video game designers weren't yet applying
and so we went back.
Now I'm sure I could wrap this point up here
in a neat little bow and say something like,
the real test of a creative work
isn't having a lot of good ideas.
It's understanding when you have to change them
to make them work, but then you have to ask,
why would anyone be so rigid about pre-production
and unwilling to rethink things like this?
Well, because they have to be.
Think about how much game development
has changed since the 90s.
If someone had a better idea about a mechanic
or wanted to rewrite the opening
or redo some dialogue or swap the first two levels,
it wasn't too much work,
and crucially, not that much work was wasted.
It's pretty easy to steer a canoe.
Larger ships, however, are notoriously difficult to steer
even when you see the problem in time.
You know, like in that movie.
Uh, Speed II?
Games are vastly more expensive to make now.
Need scores of programmers, artists, animators,
directors, producers, designers, writers.
Companies need organizational.
Wait, I have more. Production assistants,
general managers, composers, sound designers,
mo-cap artists, the entire second company
you farmed out the boss fights to,
not to mention voice actors you have to call back in
to do more work if you need to change anything big,
and incidentally, one of Human Revolution's
other really big problems exists completely
because they didn't want to have to call back a voice actor.
I never asked for this.
Things do need to be planned that much more in advance
and stuck to pretty strictly if all these folks
are gonna manage to come together
to produce something that works at all.
If someone on the team thought the opening
kind of sucked and needed some reworking
and I'm willing to bet several of them did,
what were they gonna do?
Cut out millions of dollars of work?
Remove all that content you made
and have to make even more?
Tell the higher-ups you blew a ton of time and money
and need more of it?
They had to fight all the way to the top
to get a fucking poster in here.
Do you think they're gonna get that far
asking them for the time to redo something this big?
Now, I'm not strictly saying they wanted
to fix the opening and couldn't.
There's no way of knowing for certain
unless someone who worked at IDES Montreal
wants to go on record. Please email me.
I'm just saying that in the AAA landscape
that has sprouted as gaming became
one of the biggest industries on the planet,
you have so much less room to change and improve
once you realize a guy disappears after mission four,
and guess what? A guy literally does disappear
after mission four.
We'll get to that later.
Human Revolution has many of the exact problems
the original Deus Ex team have described
their game having before they had the chance
to go back and fix it.
It just didn't get the polish and rethinking
that made Deus Ex 1 quite so special,
and this leads to much bigger problems
than a boring opening.
If you asked me what was the most important thing
about these games, and you're watching this video
so implicitly you are asking me,
I'd say it's giving the player agency,
giving them the freedom to make their own choices.
Most of Human Revolution's biggest issues
spring from a misunderstanding
of what this actually means.
Instead of giving players meaningful choices
to make as Adam Jensen,
lots of the game is about watching Adam Jensen
make his own choices without the player's control.
♪♪
During the first level at the manufacturing plant,
while you're making your way through
or past the gang that has occupied it,
there are hostages you can try to save,
and there's also a climactic standoff
with Zeke Sanders, the ringleader,
who has a hostage at gunpoint.
You can trigger a shootout where he kills the hostage
and then attacks you, but if you're quick enough,
you can take him out first and the hostage survives.
You can also just let him go.
This will cause the hostage to be killed
in the crossfire during his escape,
but you can actually talk him into letting her go
and just walking out.
One of the hostages you can save earlier
is this woman's husband.
If you saved both of them,
they feel indebted to you and tell you
to catch up with them later at their place.
You're a true hero, man.
I'll find some way to repay this, I swear.
If you do, they give you the address of an arms dealer
and get him to give you a discount.
This is a really neat little side story
that ties into the player's actions.
The discount isn't even that useful
for reasons we'll explore later,
and these characters don't do anything else afterwards,
but you don't need any wider effects
than that for this to work.
I can never thank you enough for what you did.
The fun here comes from feeling briefly
that you're tangibly involved
in two tiny little digital lives,
that the things you're doing
and how you do them can make a difference.
This side quest is genuinely really nice.
However, it's also the best you're getting.
When it comes to the main story,
the thing you're focusing on for most of the game,
the player has little to no freedom or control.
You get to choose the in-flight meal,
but the plane's on autopilot, and oh, no,
a metaphor for the direction the story's taking.
The actual story of the manufacturing plant level
is about Adam walking in on a hacker
going after the company's sensitive data,
and I say Adam here, not the player,
because once you reach the door,
you're forced to watch him immediately get seen
by the hacker and watch him get hacked
by a double hacker and then fail
to stop the hacker shooting himself.
Help me.
♪♪
This is an important story moment
they thought would be really cool, you see,
so the player's ability to interact with it
needed to take a back seat.
You don't get to decide what to do about the hacker.
You get to watch a movie.
Patch me to Seraph now.
♪♪
Oh, yeah, this is great.
This could have been an engaging gameplay sequence.
The player could have been able to knock them out
using stealth or grab them
before they managed to shoot themselves
and only get this outcome if they were too slow
and failed to stop them.
You know, like that thing they do a few minutes later.
Just do this but for the part of the story
that actually matters.
This would give the player a sense of direct interaction
with the major events of the plot.
The story wouldn't even need to change too much.
Sure, this character dying here
probably seems too important at first glance
since the next quest involves breaking into the morgue
of a police station to recover his brain computer
from his body, but what if,
even if you knocked him out,
he mysteriously turned up dead in police custody?
This would actually enhance the sense of a conspiracy
while also making the player feel like
they were involved in it.
Instead of being, how dare the police
not give my tech startup complete access
to a corpse they just recovered five minutes ago,
it would be, holy shit, they're in on it.
They killed him.
We can't let them get away with this.
Ooh, hang on.
Can we just talk about the design
of this room for a second?
It's built so you can see the hacker
when you come in through the frosted glass,
but you can't, like, distract him
or come in through another route
or shoot him through the glass
or get his attention in any way.
You just have to watch him playing this animation
until you trigger the cutscene by going through the door.
You can even see there's another way in,
but you can't get over this stuff to get behind him.
What's kind of insulting is they put an invisible wall here
so you can't climb over it when you can climb over
the stuff that's the same height right next to it.
It's like they went out of their way
to make it as obvious as possible
that you have no choice except to come in through this room
this one way and trigger the cutscene.
Instead of giving you a reasonable amount of control,
the game makes increasingly awkward attempts
to make you feel like you're making more choices
than you actually are.
After the standoff, the cops have alternate lines
of dialogue for almost every specific big thing
that happened at the factory.
If Sanders got away, if you killed him,
if you saved the hostages or not,
they all instantly know and have thoughts
about every major thing you just did.
Diffusing that bomb was some quick work.
You should get a commendation.
You have no idea how quickly I diffused the bomb.
You weren't there.
God damn!
Nice job securing the plant.
I wouldn't have thought a security guard
could handle this.
Doesn't even stop trying to kick the door down
to tell me what he thinks about how I handled things.
What a pro.
When you get back to Sarif headquarters,
everyone else reacts to your choices too
in a way that starts to feel stilted and artificial
like they're breathing down your neck
trying to make you feel noticed.
Talks all over the office, Mr. J.
You really took care of those puny first assholes.
How'd you take them down without killing them?
Almost everyone at your job already has something to say.
How did that monster get away from you?
You saved the hostages, didn't you, Jensen?
Apparently there wasn't much bloodshed thanks to you.
Pritchard has one of two dialogue lines
based on how many guys you killed at the plant.
Well, well, if it isn't Attila the Hun,
fresh from the killing fields.
But if you killed very few people, he says this.
Well, if it isn't Mahatma Gandhi himself.
Come to honor us all with his life-preserving presence.
Now, this is cute,
accounting for the player's choices like this,
but this one line is all that changes.
In fact, even if you haven't killed anyone in the game yet,
his next line is still this.
Stick to kicking down doors and shooting people, Jensen,
and stop trying to do my job.
Someone wrote Pritchard to treat Jensen like a serial killer
then realized they should probably account
for the possibility the player hasn't killed anyone
and added precisely one alternative line
and moved on.
I get the desire to make your home base
feel like it's reacting to the player's choices.
It's a really good idea on paper
and you know those guys loved paper.
Ha ha, good one.
But if you execute it poorly,
it doesn't feel like characters reacting
to things another character did.
It feels like writers scrambling to find ways
to make you feel involved in a story.
Jensen, is it true Sanders acted surprised
when he heard about the hacker?
Uh, buddy, that just happened.
I just got back right now.
Who told you this? Did you read the script?
Luckily, this problem solves itself.
After the early levels,
the player has so little control over what happens
that NPCs run out of things to react to you doing.
Either that or even the writers realized
how weird it would be if the people
at your Detroit headquarters were like,
hey, Adam, way to steal that key card
from that brothel in China.
The game has another way of creating
the illusion of choice though.
Many sequences have dialogue choices.
These feel like choices because, well,
they are technically, but what the game doesn't tell you
is these choices do nothing.
So how's it feel being augmented?
Excuse me?
The main character Jensen interacts with
in the game is Farida Malik,
Sarif Industries pilot.
When you leave for the first level,
she asks how you feel about coming back into work.
When you get back to her afterwards,
she asks for your take on the events of the mission,
and as soon as you land, she asks you
how you feel about being augmented.
You get a lot of opportunities
to choose what to say to Malik.
Getting to make the choices is nice,
but none of this does anything.
Malik maybe gets annoyed in reply
to the thing you just said,
but it doesn't have any wider effect.
These choices aren't here to give you control
over a relationship with a character.
They're here to make you feel like
you have that kind of control.
The game just briefly pretends
to be Mass Effect sometimes,
but with hexagons instead of a wheel.
I think people should stop asking me so many questions.
Then about two minutes later,
the player is asked by someone else
how he feels about being augmented.
How do you handle all of this?
It's the pretend players are making choices trick
so nice they used it twice.
This time is special, though,
because he says the line.
♪ ♪
I never asked for this.
Yeah!
People were waiting with bated breath
to see if Adam says the line from the trailer.
I'm so glad they put it in there.
A bunch of other stuff in the trailers didn't.
Corporations have more power than the government.
That's the most political thing Adam Jensen says.
I want to play the game this was a trailer for.
Oh, sweet. It's the cursed trailer
version of this scene.
This face haunts my nightmares.
In many RPGs, how you talk to other characters
affects how they feel about you,
impacts the story, or comes back up in some way, you know?
What if I told you that at no point
do any dialogue choices you ever make
affect anything other than the character's
immediate reaction?
There's a part where you can optionally help her
unravel the death of one of her best friends
and catch the real killer.
What effect does this have on your relationship?
She goes, thanks,
and you never hear about it again.
What if, for example,
Adam could be a real piece of shit to his pilot
and she stopped being friendly with him
or didn't ask for his help later
or straight up refused to work with him
and he got assigned a worse pilot
who didn't make small talk for the rest of the game?
Instead, you get to pick angry, happy, or ambivalent,
and she goes, okay,
and the game continues like nothing happened.
Your pilot will still be your friend
and still ask for your help in a later side quest
no matter how you treat her.
Even when you technically have a choice,
it only accentuates how little control you're being given.
So what do you want me to do, boss?
Take the mission to break into a police station morgue
and find the hacker's delicious brain chips.
You get this mission via your boss
literally ordering you to do it.
Get over to the station and find a way inside.
Contact me when you've gotten a hold of it.
But this is a modern RPG with dialogue options,
so you're given the option of saying,
hey, you're ordering me to do a really big crime here, right?
What you're asking me to do,
it's not exactly legal.
No, it isn't.
You got a problem with that?
You can make Adam say he's not happy about,
you know, robbing a police station,
but the response is, too bad.
That's the game, idiot.
Yes, but... but nothing.
So get going.
The creators wanted to do a mission
where you have to get into a police station.
That's fine, and you have a lot of options
for how to do that,
but games which use dialogue like this
usually offer different outcomes
for making different choices.
If this was Mass Effect or Fallout,
you could talk your boss into trying a different approach
for getting the information he needs,
or alternatively, you could just not offer
the illusion of a choice.
If Adam had just said of his own accord,
I don't like it, but I see how it's the only option,
and moved on, it wouldn't have been a problem.
JC spoke for himself all the time.
You're making the limits of the player's role
in the story really obvious
when their big choice in dialogue
amounts to how willingly their character
agrees to commit a crime.
Adam Jensen is an ex-cop who doesn't play by the rules,
whether he likes it or not.
Instead of you getting to make the choices,
there's another character in the story
making them for you.
Cutscene Jensen.
At numerous points,
Adam either does something very stupid
without you having a choice
because the plot demands it,
or worse, he does something really cool
it would have been fun to actually play.
There's one sequence later
where the player plants a bomb on a desk.
Luckily, they built the desk with a large glowing spot
for in case someone needs to plant a bomb.
They do those at Ikea now.
Now, this is a setup
to a potentially thrilling gameplay sequence
where the player has to escape the explosion in time
or find cover and capitalize on the distraction
caused by the explosion,
but instead it cuts to a video of Jensen doing it.
♪♪
Shit.
♪♪
I'm not gonna lie, though.
This does look really fun and tense.
It would have been really fun to play it.
♪♪
The cutscene continues for another, like,
minute and a half as Jensen hides from the guards
and then he decides to hide in a shipping container,
finds a cryogenic pod in the shipping container,
and then decides to just climb into it for some reason.
This is how you find out this pod exists, by the way.
He just finds it and gets in it,
and then he wakes up on a secret base a few days later.
Oh. Well, that's cool.
Couldn't the objective for the player have been
to trigger that explosion
and then get into the pod themselves?
Like, that could have been a really fun mission.
We just got to watch our guy have fun.
Like, what?
A pretty standard rule of games is that if something cool
happens in the story, the player should get to do it.
Warren Spector, the director of Deus Ex,
did a post-mortem on the game at GDC a few years back
and somewhat jokingly listed the ten commandments he had
when he was developing the game,
and one of them was to let players do the cool stuff.
If something is cool,
don't even think about letting an NPC do it.
Players do the cool stuff.
NPCs watch the player do the cool stuff.
I like to describe the first Deus Ex
as surprisingly linear.
Since the player is always the one
doing the important things with no cut scenes
doing it for them, you always feel like the driving force
of the story even though technically you're just
completing an objective someone gave you.
So when all the most pivotal moments in the game
consist of Adam doing the cool stuff while you watch,
which occasionally pauses to ask you
if you'd like to do something else
before forcing you anyway,
you start to feel like a non-player character.
In the game that you're playing,
some of Human Revolution's potentially
best playable moments take the form
of heavily compressed 720p video files.
After making his way to the CEO of the corporation
that might have murdered his co-workers and loved ones,
a cut scene plays where she tries to shoot him
and he disarms her.
Then there's some back and forth,
and a few seconds later, he turns his back on her
and gives her the opportunity to trick him
and lock him out of the room
and send, like, 12 guys after him.
Men never fail to underestimate women.
Oh-ho-ho-ho! Gender!
You spend hours getting to the executive suite
of this corporation.
You put in all this work,
and then cut scene Jensen just...oops.
Situations where the player has no chance to react,
uh, in the Deus Ex world are bad.
Shit!
You can't have contrived developments like this
without seriously affecting the player's sense
they have any say in the story.
This segment is especially easy to recognize as a problem
because it has a beat-for-beat equivalent in Deus Ex 1,
meaning we can directly compare the two.
When JC Denton goes after his game's female CEO
of a large Chinese biotech corporation
which seems to be part of the conspiracy,
wow, they just copied that, didn't they?
The character welcomes you in
and tells you a fairly compelling story
about being friends with your brother
and which faction is responsible for the current problems.
You have to figure out what to do next
with that information.
If you believe her and follow her objective,
she goes into hiding and the job she gives you
turns out to be basically a trap to kill you.
Yeah, breaking into a Hong Kong police station
looking for evidence they supposedly covered up.
That's not a recipe for getting exploded.
The player gets to actively decide whether to trust her.
If they did, they have to have a lightsaber fight with her
when they run into her again because this game is so cool.
And she died.
Ah!
Or they can snoop around some more in her apartment
and find the entire secret base in her home.
Or they can just, like, shoot her, like, right away
or snipe her from another building
without ever talking to her.
Throw a bomb through her window.
I just want to observe for a second
that in the original Deus Ex,
breaking into a police station is a trap
to try to kill you that was meant to sound
so ridiculous you realize you're being tricked
and choose to do something else,
but in Human Revolution, it's the only option you have
to progress the story and you cannot say no.
Players being able to make choices
and express themselves would get in the way
of the amazing movie the creators
wished they were making.
Spoilers, they want this character
to be the final boss,
so you have no choice but to sit and watch Adam
delay the plot by ten more hours.
This problem bleeds into the gameplay.
While there's often a degree of choice
in how you solve problems,
the consequences of your choices are meaningless
because the story wasn't designed to account for them.
You can recover the neural hub from the police station
by, well, annihilating it.
You don't have to bother with talking your way in
by absolving a cop of the guilt of the child he killed
or sneaking in via the side entrance
or the roof or the sewers.
You can also go in guns blazing.
Make a real hog roast of a building
full of human beings and the cops interrogating them too.
This is a refreshing New Vegas-esque level
of freedom to be given in how to deal with a situation.
100% coolest level in the game in terms of player freedom.
I mean, look how many cops you can kill.
How could it possibly be a bad level?
You'll see!
♪ ♪
Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha!
This fucking clown car office.
What the fuck is this?
What, were they guarding this vent?
The problem with this level is the effect
these choices have or rather should have.
Like, this would be a big deal, right?
We were just caught on camera killing a lot of people.
This is one of the top ten mass shootings
in America this week.
Our face should be on the news.
We'd be a wanted man.
Sarif Industries would have to fire us
and issue a public apology for giving us both the arms
and the arms to do it with.
The debate on if augmentations should be legal
would shift a bit.
I'm not an expert on video game storytelling
but something should happen as a result of this, right?
Boss, I got the neural hub.
What happens is nothing.
Everything's fine.
This never comes up.
You come back to Detroit later in the game
and there's no wanted posters.
The cops are friendly. Nothing has happened.
But then what if you learned to like the taste of bacon
and keep going?
What if you continue to fight cops in the street,
blow up their mechs, snipe them, explode them,
just fucking go to town on an entire police force?
You want to know what happens then?
When you get done with a quest in a convention center,
on your way out, a cop approaches you
with a side quest to help the police.
Adam, I need you to trust me on this.
You've got to help me find Jacob.
They need help stopping a terrorist who hates cops.
No, they're talking about someone else.
You get offered this quest
when you leave the convention center
even if you have killed every cop
you've ever seen so far in the game.
They're really short-staffed because of the riots
which is why they need outside help from an ex-cop.
The fact Adam is a big reason why they're short-staffed
doesn't cost him the job apparently.
Just think about that.
You can do an actual mass murder
and get deputized by the survivors
to catch a psychopath with a fraction of your body count.
The game feels almost embarrassed about it too
since accounting for how each player dealt
with the police station would have required a lot of work.
On your second visit to Detroit,
the police station is completely closed
and you can't even go in.
There's no two ways around it.
This is cheating.
They're dodging the responsibility
of doing anything with the choices they gave the player.
The best you get is if you do tenderize
the Gammon Warehouse, a newspaper in the next level
says, massacre at police station or something.
This newspaper is so easy to miss,
I didn't get any footage of it during this playthrough.
So if you blink, you miss the consequences
of going to war with the Detroit PD.
The effects of your choices fade away once you make them.
Look, nature is healing.
The cops are right back patrolling the streets
I killed their buddies in.
You see those guns on the ground?
Those are the guns the guys I killed on my way in
dropped when I murdered them.
The game treats the player's choices
about violence extremely weirdly,
forgiving you for even the most extreme acts of terror...
-...but also making sure
you can't play the game truly peacefully either.
I mean, let me just read you one of the game's achievements.
Ahem, pacifist.
Complete Deus Ex Human Revolution
without anyone dying by your hand.
Boss fights do not count.
-♪♪
-♪♪
-♪♪
-♪♪
-♪♪
-♪♪
-♪♪
-♪♪
-♪♪
Now, it might just be me,
but the standards for pacifism have really sli...
Wait, that guy's still alive. Get him!
-♪♪
It's important to stress here that Deus Ex
never did anything like this.
Technically speaking, it only had cut scenes
when you got into a plane
and were traveling to the next level
and I guess the endings too.
Everything else was either gameplay or dialogue.
At no point does JC Denton do something of his own accord.
He's the player's avatar.
He's meant to be an expression of your choices.
Meanwhile, no matter how peaceful
you make Adam Jensen behave,
there's still going to be a cut scene
where he tries to shoot a woman in the chest.
-♪♪
Pacifist.
There's a bit of a disconnect here
in terms of how much control the player has
is what I'm saying.
It's always insulting
to not have a choice in something
or be congratulated for not doing something
that you literally have to do,
but what's even worse is when a game tells you
you're going to be given a choice
and then just forgets.
There's one incredibly strange part
where the second boss character, Rihanna,
is heavily injured from the fight
and Jensen is asked if he will help her.
-"Her life signs are fading.
Will you save her?"
-"I'll think about it."
But then she just quietly dies
and is a corpse once the cut scene is over.
There is a dog barking.
Apparently in an early draft of the game,
the player got to decide if they killed bosses
after defeating them and then they decided not to
or weren't able to add this mechanic for whatever reason.
-"The script kind of implies that she's not dead yet
and are you going to save her?
Initially, we had wanted to have the, um,
the final blow for the bosses was up to the player
to decide whether he was going to do it or not
and when the cut scene's over,
the player could end up, uh, killing her,
but in truth, we kind of lost that
in the process of our production
and we never did change the lines."
After the next boss fight, the guy's like,
ugh, finish it because he's a badass.
That's his character, right?
And Jensen's like, not until you tell me
what I need to know and then he dies anyway
like a second later.
You can smell the point in the cut scene
where a moral choice would have gone
and then, well, they kind of lost that
in the process of their production.
I think that's a diplomatic way of saying
they didn't finish the game.
This lack of control over the story
to the extent players are being told
they're going to get some choices
which they are then not given
makes the story start to feel flat
and like you're not really taking part in it.
Now to be clear, the game isn't completely devoid
of branching story choices.
At one point near the end, you get shot down
and if you don't kill a couple guys,
the pilot is killed.
It's intended as a reference to the original
where your pilot can also die,
but in Deus Ex, it's an excuse
for investigation and subterfuge.
You have to find the corpse of a mechanic
and wonder what's up with that.
Notice the weird guy also dressed as a mechanic?
I fixed her right up for you.
And kill him or report him to his boss.
That mechanic was an imposter.
Oh, my God, JC, a bomb.
A bomb.
You can completely miss all of this
if you're not paying attention,
and if you do miss it,
hours and hours later on the last level,
your pilot's copter explodes
and you don't really know why.
This is part of the subtle beauty of the original.
The game doesn't make it clear
how much control you have sometimes,
so when this happens,
you get to wonder if you could have saved him.
There's tons of minor ways the story can change
that some players don't even know about
and only find out about on forums years later.
This isn't quite as special
when it's shoot all of these guys
or your pilot dies now.
Also, the way the game accounts
for her death just sucks.
If you save her, she later heroically flies in
to knock out some guys
and save the scientists you rescued,
but if she dies, obviously this means
she doesn't turn up,
so there's some serious story implications
for the survival of these scientists.
Just kidding, an aircraft is on the landing pad now
for no reason, and they fly it out.
What?
They could have made Farida Malek's death
have interesting consequences,
and they just don't.
They just don't.
There is one really good story choice
in the game, though.
See you soon, Mr. Jensen.
Ooh.
Partway through, you start having minor glitches,
and it becomes clear it's affecting
other augmented people too.
You all have them at once even.
Ooh.
I like how it's done too,
these minor mutual freak outs
where everyone gets injured and confused.
This is some pretty neat storytelling actually.
Uh, well, it's still pretty good.
Anyway, you get a side objective
to replace the defective chip causing this.
If you go to a clinic, the game goes,
are you sure you want to do this?
As if to say, hey, you're making a big choice here,
and for once, you are.
If you get the replacement then in a later level
before a boss fight,
the lady from before flips a switch
and you have to fight the boss
with your screen all fuzzy.
Wow, my choices affected the story.
If you think this is the smartest thing in the game,
I'm very sorry to tell you that you are correct.
It is. There's another little way
the plot can kind of branch actually.
If you wait around at your HQ
before going to their first mission,
your boss yells at you to get to the helipad.
Helipad. And eventually,
the hostages you could have saved
in that mission are dead before you get there.
Christ, Adam, while you were strolling around
the offices, the situation got worse.
Wait a second, though.
The game just dropped me in a new level
full of people to talk to
and then yelled at me to ignore all of it
to get to the mission as fast as I can?
Yeah, I really have the sense that time
is of the essence in human revolution.
Oh my God.
Did you ever think about how, like,
the myth of Icarus is about transhumanism?
Like, with the wings?
No, I didn't.
A-Adam, that's... that's really stupid.
You see? This is why we broke up.
I still can't believe you don't like Ghost in the Shell.
Oh my God, are you guys talking about Ghost in the Shell?
That is one of the most important movies ever made.
I mean, it's a good movie.
It's a good movie.
It's a good movie.
It's a good movie.
It's a good movie.
It's a good movie.
It's one of the best movies ever made.
I cannot wait to see it.
This is a game that just made you unskippably
go on a walking tour of a floor of this building.
They took their sweet fucking time.
Why can't I?
I mean, the guy's name is Bateau.
The French word for boat.
And he owns a boat?
Ah, come on.
We don't know he owns the boat.
That's not in the wiki.
This game does not get to say,
hey, we're on the clock here
after slapping you in the face with this opening.
Fuck you if you think this is clever.
Sorry. No, that's a joke.
This is pretty clever,
but for that to be one of the few times
the story is affected by your choices
is just insulting.
I think the worst thing about all this
is how promising it manages to be
about its characters and choices at times.
There's a blueprint in here for a fantastic story
with all kinds of little choices like this one.
The couple you can save at the manufacturing plant
are a great example too,
but I especially like the way Zeke Sanders is used.
Not because the pre-rendered cutscene
is just that cool and badass,
but because eventually the cutscene ends
and you get to be involved in the story.
If you knock him out, he's in the police station
talking about how he'll be out soon anyway
because he has powerful friends.
I won't be here long.
If you killed him, he's in the morgue
next to the guy whose neural hub you need.
If you let him go, he later contacts you
and gives you some information in return,
like he feels like he owes you one.
My debt is paid.
It's really neat how different your relationship
with this one guy can get based on what you did.
Way later in the game, if he survived all this,
he's a hostile NPC during the mission
to go after a guy who, it turns out, surprise twist,
is actually his brother, Sanders.
Sanderses?
Ezekiel's impact on the story
is minimal after the first encounter.
He could die right here
so they can't make him too important,
but he's what you really want to see
from a game like this.
Characters who react to your choices
and feel like their own pieces of a larger world.
I hate to say it, but very few other characters
are as well thought out as this.
Take his brother I just mentioned.
Isaiah Sandoval is a high-ranking member
of a different, non-terrorist-y
anti-augmentation group.
You meet him a few levels in
and you can argue with him about augmentations,
although none of it affects the story at all.
It's just optional dialogue.
Later, he shows up in a recording
interacting with the guys who shot you
and killed slash kidnapped your friends.
I know this guy.
When you get to Sandoval,
he tells you what he knows then tries to shoot you,
but if you found out his location
by publicly implicating him in the conspiracy
in front of his boss,
his boss basically pins everything on him,
so instead, once you get here,
he's distraught and decides to kill himself
as penance for his crimes,
which he feels genuine guilt over.
You get the chance to try to talk him down
over the course of a deeply engaging conversation,
and for a few minutes,
everything about this game really works.
Sandoval feels like a character with a real inner life
who we have to speak to like a person,
and we're only having this conversation
in the first place because of the effects
of another choice we made.
This is a perfectly sculpted piece
of a really good game.
It's one of the reasons why this game
is worth talking about because it's disheartening
that the game is missing the rest of the pieces.
Firstly, this character isn't someone
you got to deal with in any particularly
meaningful way beforehand.
You met him once for five seconds half a game ago.
Instead of being the culmination
of a relationship between two characters,
it's just a really resonant moment
in the middle of a story that's become a bit of a mess
which you had little to no say in,
and worse, now the game is done with him,
he instantly exits the story and is never seen again.
Sandoval already told you everything you need to know
in the cut scene before this standoff,
so if you talk him down or if he kills himself
or if you talk him down and then kill him for fun
or if none of this happened and this room was just a fight...
Ow.
It doesn't change anything.
The story is not affected in any way
by any of these outcomes.
This character's survival,
especially considering you can convince him
to turn on the other conspirators
and come out with the truth,
should have interesting plot implications.
His death or survival should have had an impact
on what sort of ending you get.
Oh, God, don't get me started.
But once you're done, he just sits there.
His part in the story is completed now.
You don't need to wait with me, Mr. Jensen.
I will not resist my fate when it arrives.
Yeah, get out of here.
I need to sit here for a week
so I don't have a chance
to introduce consequences to the plot.
It's just kind of weird that you introduce
some of these characters, you interact with them
a little bit, and then you never hear from him again.
What happened to that guy?
It's so easy to imagine how much better
the game could have handled its characters and choices.
Like, what if your attitude towards augmentations
in the previous meeting affected how Sandoval treated you
once you found him?
Like, if you seemed amenable
to anti-augmentation arguments,
he saw you as a potential friend here
and trusted you with the information
because he figured you'd do the right thing with it?
What if, just a thought, how you treated his brother
the last three times you ran into him
affected his feelings about you?
The fact you literally shot his brother to death
or let him go during an armed standoff
somehow never comes up.
What if turning him against his boss
had some really cool or meaningful consequence
so the player feels like they really did something?
Like, I'm not saying the story has to branch
in some huge way, but do something.
Maybe he gives you the key to his gun cabinet
and it's full of weapon upgrades
or those grenades he apparently had on him.
Literally the only difference
is a newspaper says something different
and I guess you get more experience points
for talking him down.
This is especially weird because Deus Ex had a knack
for remembering things you did and having them come up later.
The first level of this game also had a hostage to save,
one of many direct parallels between the games,
and whether you bothered to save him or not
affects how he feels about you for the rest of the game.
I have seen that he knows the procedure
of a good offensive.
I will not forget a favor.
Even when he becomes a boss fight,
he'll still have a grudging respect for you.
I regret that only once we worked together.
You came all the way to Paris to tell me that?
You can walk in on a guy asking a doctor
for maintenance advice and learn he has
the same augmentations as you.
The fact you did this comes up 20 hours later
when you fight him.
If you recall our chat in the break room
at UNATCO, you know that I have
the same augmentation technology as you.
Then this will be a good fight.
All I'm saying is it would have been nice
if Sandoval acknowledged something as important
as whether I killed his brother or not.
That's not too much to ask, is it?
This whole cutscene, I was waiting for him
to say something, but no.
The game cares so little for how this scene works out
that no matter what happens, one second later,
Adam makes an identical phone call.
I see you!
Richard, get this.
The GPLs are still transmitting.
Sandoval switched them to a lower frequency.
Take the gun.
You win.
Richard, get this.
Forgive me.
-$%&!
Richard, get this.
Hey, Richard, a guy just killed himself
right in front of me. Anyway, check this out.
Couldn't you at least have got a few different takes?
Oh, Sandoval, you could have been so cool,
but once I leave this room, you cease to exist.
Good night, sweet prince, and may flights of angels.
Oh, that actually kill. Oh, Jesus.
Getting to make more choices like this
would have vastly improved the experience.
I hate that we didn't get a game
full of stuff like Zeke Sanders,
but after a few hours, it becomes clear
the player is less of a participant
and more a chauffeur, transporting cutscene Jensen
between opportunities to trip over his own dick.
Women never fail to underestimate men.
Oh, ho, ho, ho! Gender!
This is how a cyberpunk game
about our transhumanist future addresses gender.
Men do be shopping for augmentations.
As the story makes it increasingly clear
the person playing it is only tangentially involved,
people stop paying attention.
You don't have any say in what's happening,
so what's the point?
That's cutscene Jensen's problem.
The problem the player has to deal with
is the sweeping and often misguided changes
to the original's gameplay.
♪♪
Watch it. This one's some...
Deus Ex is a tremendously important game
in the history of the medium,
one of, if not the best of all time.
Hold on, let me... there we go.
Many designers on all types of games
cite it as a direct inspiration for their own work,
but it's been over 20 years now.
Is Deus Ex really as good as everyone remembe...
Yes, yes it is. Shut the fuck up.
There's a good reason why there's a decades-old in-joke
that every time you mention it, someone will reinstall it.
In-jokes are what people call memes when they're funny.
It's the ultimate example of a game
that's more than the sum of its parts.
That phrase gets thrown around a lot
by game critics trying to punch up their reviews
with fancy words, but this is the rare time
when it's actually true.
In post-mortems and retrospectives,
Warren Spector is delightfully open
about how right down to the wire,
mere months from release, the game just wasn't fun.
By September 1999, we were done.
Except we weren't.
The game was not good enough.
It wasn't ready to ship.
Deus Ex was made out of so many individual components
that had to not just work well, but work well together,
that it was a huge mess right up until it suddenly
became a beautiful web of interlocking systems.
So we had real people come in and play the game.
I called that particular milestone
the, wow, these missions suck, milestone.
Uh, we had a lot of work to do.
This is why this game's formula is hard to recreate
and even harder to improve on.
So many moving parts have to work with each other.
Even if a change sounds good or even is good in some contexts,
since every change affects the way
all the systems relate to each other,
it can still result in a worse game.
And immersive sims come together very late
when all of your little game systems and rules
are all working together magically
to produce this amazing experience.
The creators of Human Revolution
made a lot of big changes to these core mechanics.
Lapikus's talk contains a segment
where he summarizes the Human Revolution team's
collective criticisms of the original.
I'm about to say some negative things
about the best PC game of all times.
Now see here, buddy!
Okay, but seriously, it's really good
to take an especially critical look at a game
even if it's as beloved as the original.
You know, if you seriously want to improve on Deus Ex,
this is how you start.
The issue is what they decided were problems
and how they fixed them.
The game was designed specifically
for the PS3 and Xbox 360
with a separate company entirely handling the PC port.
The creators appear to be trying to streamline down
the Deus experience for console players,
removing many mechanics they feared wouldn't appeal
to people who don't like complicated RPGs.
Lapikus says they didn't dumb it down in his talk,
but I think we get to be the judge of that.
So obviously the first thing we should look at
is the first thing that happens in the game,
character creation.
Not Human Revolution's character creation,
of course, because, uh, there isn't any.
["Dark Souls"-style music plays in the background.]
In true RPG fashion,
Deus Ex slaps you in the face with a spreadsheet
before you can start playing.
Ow, my brain!
At least the default name
isn't Non this time.
Everyone calls you JC,
but that's just the character's code name.
You can enter a real name,
and it comes up in a few places here and there.
You Denton?
Denton's an old code name
from my UNATCO days,
but it seems to have stuck.
And even though it's a little clunky,
it's always fun to be making meaningful choices
as soon as you begin.
There's no 45-minute openings
and tutorials to get through first.
The tutorial's actually a separate thing
you can skip entirely,
and for the year 2000,
being able to choose your ethnicity
was pretty cool.
It was so nice to finally find a game
that represented my skin type.
Throughout the game, you acquired more skill points
and could level up more at any time through the menu.
It's a very rewarding system to engage with,
but you know, it's a lot of looking at numbers,
thinking, making fun decisions,
you know, boring nerd stuff.
In Lapicus's critical summary,
he calls Deus Ex a heavy management kind of game.
Oh, no, what if the gamers
see a character creation screen?
They might instantly decide the game is bad
and go back to Gears of War.
We better make it simpler just in case.
So character creation is out,
but the team were actually very smart
about how they went about this.
They still realized the importance
of getting to make choices about the character
and that sense of growth and development,
and they found a way to make that still happen
because in the first game, you were also developing
in a much more engaging way at the same time.
Throughout the world, you were finding
augmentation canisters,
which provided special, unique upgrades
to the player's abilities on a completely separate screen
from the skill point one.
So the team made a pretty clever
streamlining decision and combined
these two systems into one.
Now you do all your upgrading on one menu,
and instead of acquiring, managing,
and spending thousands of points,
you get upgrades by spending praxis points,
which are either found in the world
or given to you every time you gain enough experience.
If your goal is to simplify character progression,
this is a really obvious and smart choice.
It's less complicated and more direct.
You spend a point on a thing,
and now you can do the thing.
Whee. A lot of the more boring skills
have been removed.
Swimming? Get out of here.
Adam doesn't do any swimming in the entire game.
They streamlined the game so well,
there aren't even any streams,
but overall, I'd say all of this is pretty good.
Well, it's definitely simpler at least,
but to simplify a mechanic means
removing something from it,
and that means you risk removing
what made the thing you're simplifying
fun in the first place.
You can always improve on an old design,
but sometimes it worked that way for a reason
because here's the thing about augmentation canisters.
You didn't just get to pick an augmentation
when you found one.
Each canister had two specific abilities in it,
and you could only choose one of them.
In any given playthrough,
you only got up to half the abilities you could have.
You were building a unique character
who couldn't have everything.
In Human Revolution,
you're just picking them from a list,
and you can get all of them if you have enough points.
By the end of the game,
everyone's JC Denton was a little bit different.
Everyone's Adam Jensen is exactly the same.
He just gets there in a slightly different order.
I want to take a moment to appreciate
the original game's augmentation system
because while the experience point stuff
was a turn-off to some people,
the augs were a thing of beauty.
You see, since each canister
had only two augmentations in it
and you could only choose one,
the player was being given an extremely engaging choice.
Hey, do you want to run faster or run silently?
Because it's a choice between just two things,
it's elegant and clear and hard to get anxious
about which choice to make.
You just have to decide which you want more.
It's a binary choice.
It's literally the simplest kind of choice there is.
When you get a praxis point in Human Revolution,
the game says, great,
please pick one of 30 things to spend it on
in a huge menu full of sub-menus,
and by the way, you can't get half of them
because you actually needed two points.
For a huge portion of players,
the very first experience with the augmentation system
is finding the first point, opening a menu,
and spending several minutes reading all the things
they could do with it, realizing they need two
to get anything good,
and they have to close the menu down again
and carry on playing until they find another.
Worse, this extreme amount of things to choose from
causes a kind of decision anxiety
which never happened in the original
with its much more simple choices.
You know how tons of people play Human Revolution?
They don't spend their points.
They hoard them until they find a hole
they need the slow-fall power to get down
or a wall they want to punch
or another thing that needs an augmentation
to progress and spend the points right then and there,
so you're not really building a character anymore.
You're paying a toll once you hit a section
that needs a certain skill.
The design of the system is misleading
about how complicated it is.
This clip is of me spending 45 seconds
looking for an augmentation I wanted.
You know, the one that lets you take down
two guys at once in physical combat
using your arms?
Where would that power be?
The arm submenu?
Correct, it should be there,
but it's actually here in the back augmentations.
It has a special submenu just to itself for no reason,
and just to really fuck with you,
the take down one person augmentation
is in the arm submenu,
and you start with this one already unlocked.
Why is this here?
What are you trying to do to me?
Ow, my brain!
Wait, and carrying capacities
in the arm submenu,
but you're not holding everything
in your arms all day.
You're carrying it.
On your back!
Put it on the back augmentation!
So if the objective was to simplify
character progression,
I don't think they achieved it nearly
as well as they'd hoped.
In practice, or should I say in praxis,
this system removes the best things
about the system it's based on
in the name of a simplicity
that wasn't actually achieved.
You also have to wait a while
before you can do any character building whatsoever.
The game tries to make sure you only get
a second praxis after the standoff
at the very end of the level,
and this was done deliberately
to hide another problem.
The conversation enhancer augmentation
costs two points and lets you make
additional choices in dialogue
based on the other character's soy levels.
I'll kill you.
It's nice to have more options,
but it tells you which answer will work
using colored lights,
turning social engagement into Simon Says.
In longer conversations,
it vomits even more UI onto your screen,
which disrupts the experience.
The Sandoval sequence is much less tense
with all this stuff everywhere
telling you how to win.
Anyway, if you play the first level
in a really meticulous way,
you can get two praxis points
before meeting Sanders.
If you spend them on the conversation enhancer,
the game does a strange thing.
It only throws up some of the stuff it's supposed to,
and it doesn't give you any more dialogue options.
You can't see his alpha, beta, or omega levels.
Shit, he's a Sigma male.
Jensen, get out of there!
You see, in the original plan for the game,
you weren't able to just open a menu
and unlock augmentations at any time.
You had to go to a clinic to get them installed.
This worked as world building,
but also sucked.
Imagine finding something
you need an augmentation for,
then having to go to the doctor to get it
and come all the way back.
Later in development, the system was changed
to how it works now,
which was a clear improvement.
However, the rest of the game
had already been designed around the original system,
and you don't go to a clinic
until the first mission is over,
so the level was made assuming players
don't have any augmentations.
For example, the conversation enhancer.
Zeke's voice actor already recorded all his lines
before this change was made,
meaning there was no way his character
could react to the enhancer with new dialogue,
so to avoid too many players noticing,
they deliberately paced the game's progression
really slowly.
And at the time that we wrote it,
we didn't even have the concept of praxis kits.
You had to go to the limb clinic to get operated on,
so I think that's why we decided
not to have it initially in this conversation
because we knew you wouldn't have had a chance
to get it yet,
and later we came in with the idea of the praxis kits,
and at that point, it became this issue of,
oh, wait, we have to make sure we don't give you two
because you might have it and we don't support it.
So character progression for entire hours of the game
is almost nonexistent because they had to avoid
a scenario they hadn't planned for,
and the saddest thing about this is
the developers are obviously painfully aware of all this.
At the beginning of the game,
the pacing to get augmentations is too slow,
and it's something that we're aware of
and we're not happy with it,
but because of those decisions and with what you explained,
we were forced to keep it this way, so...
This is one of the reasons why modern big games'
production pipelines are often so rigid
in case you were interested.
When you chart an entire game in advance
and then change your mind about how something works,
you risk breaking all the stuff that was made
assuming the game worked differently.
This is an explanation but not really an excuse.
They could have just made the social enhancer
or cost three points and make it so players
could get two a bit sooner,
or hey, maybe write and record a few more lines
for one of the best characters in this thing.
That would have been really cool
but also a lot more work for the extreme edge case
of players picking this augmentation.
Cumulatively, the new augmentation system
massively affects the feel of the entire surrounding game.
In Deus Ex, the augmentation canisters
were unique, specific objects.
If you didn't find the canister
with the augmentation you wanted in it,
you never got it.
This made exploring really fun
because unique stuff you wanted could be hidden here
and finding one felt great.
It was a new set of possibilities.
The entire world was more engaging.
Do you know how I found out there was
a cloaking device in Deus Ex?
I hacked into a secret lab storage chamber
and stole their augmentations
and one of them was a cloaking device.
It felt like a discovery,
a reward for engaging with the world
and looking around and paying attention,
and then you have a cool thing for the whole game
that feels good to use
because it feels like you earned it.
In Human Revolution, the cloaking device
is staring at you in the augmentation submenu
as soon as you open it for the first time
and you can unlock it whenever you want
for two praxis points.
Is that as fun an experience?
A thing I love about games like Deus Ex and New Vegas
is the sense they're full of secrets
and new things to find.
A corner of an abandoned vault
might have a one-of-a-kind gun in it.
A safe in a terrorist hideout
has a speed enhancement in it.
When you find it, it doesn't just feel cool.
It makes you want to find and open every safe in the world
to see what else is in them.
What if instead of all of this unique,
special stuff you tangibly found,
it was just a stack of money you could spend
buying those things in a submenu or at a store?
It's not fun exploring a world
whose most high-value reward for exploring
is a floppy disk that gives you a point
you already have six of but won't spend yet
because you have to save them in case it turns out
you need something.
I guarantee you a lot of players
missed some pretty easy-to-find praxis points
because looking for them was boring.
Oh, there's a praxis point in this elevator shaft.
What an adventure.
It's not game-ruining that it works this way.
It just makes everything a lot less fun
than it could have been, and why?
In the name of making it a bit simpler?
Human Revolution is definitely
slightly more welcoming this way.
A spreadsheet doesn't appear when you hit new game,
and at no point do you need to remember
to open a menu to spend experience points
and discover you've forgotten to do so for hours
and have thousands of them now,
but this simplicity comes at the expense
of being able to make unique and personal decisions
about your character and their role in the world.
The original was far from perfect,
but many of the complications are what made it fun,
and taking those things out
isn't necessarily an improvement.
That said, they tried to improve some aspects of the game
by adding more to them,
and that isn't always a good idea either.
One of the first criticisms on Lapicus's list
is that hacking is completely passive,
so now we need to explore what he means by that.
Oh, no.
♪ ♪
In the original game, to hack a computer,
you move your mouse over to the hacking device
and press the hack button.
For more tutorials like this, please consider subscribing.
Then you wait, and by wait,
I mean wait ten actual human seconds.
Have a sip of coffee.
Watch the cute little Matrix animation.
Ah.
Oh, it's called the Ice Breaker.
That's cute. That's a common cyberpunk term
when it comes to hacking.
It originates from, uh,
Billy Gibson's neurotic monster.
Oh, I'm in. I mean, I'm in.
Sorry, I said it wrong.
Then you have the remaining time on your hack-o-meter
to use the device and close out of it
before the alarm goes off.
But wait a second.
Hacking is pressing a button and waiting
for everything you want to hack for the whole game?
That sounds boring.
Gamers won't like that.
I don't think they have any patience
because I don't respect them.
Whoa, whoa, slow down,
Caucasian architect looking at blueprints.
You'd better take a seat, buddy,
and listen to my points about...
Oh, thank you.
You see, the hacking itself
is only one piece of the puzzle.
While you're trying to manipulate this device,
people can see you trying to hack it.
Often people you might not want seeing you
like guards or the terrorists you're hiding from
or genetically engineered space aliens.
Your vision is blacked out while you're in this screen,
so if you didn't check the coast was clear,
the time it takes to hack is risky.
It's getting more and more.
Ah! Oh!
Gah!
Despite being literally just sitting and waiting,
it's strangely tense.
You committed to this.
Was that a good idea?
Sure, if the game was just a hacking simulator,
it would be terrible and not have much gameplay,
but when you're sitting there exposed
in a building full of guys who are looking for you,
hearing the camera right behind you moving back and forth,
watching that meter slowly tick down,
it's exciting.
Hacking is also a skill,
so when you level it up, it gets much faster
and you can do more things with computers you've hacked.
This means investing more in hacking
and watching it go increasingly quickly
and become more useful feels inherently rewarding.
You feel more powerful in a very direct way.
More importantly, hacking is always optional.
If you didn't like the hacking,
you literally never had to do it.
If you were untrained in computers,
you couldn't hack at all.
You didn't even have the icebreaker.
The fact it's an active choice
and a skill you invest in
and the weight creates tension
means hacking isn't really passive.
It just might sound like it in a designer's head
when they aren't considering everything else around it.
The problem with treating hacking as passive
is that every developer tries to make it less passive
in the exact same way.
How, you ask?
With a fucking minigame.
["Minecraft Theme Song"]
Oh, my God, Bioshock, no.
If I wanted to play this bloody pipe game,
I've got, like, 50 choices to pick from on Newgrounds.com.
What are you doing, Bethesda?
You lock hacking behind a skill
and then make me play an annoying minigame
every time I want to use that skill anyway?
Come on, Prey, you're a really good example
of a modern take on this type of game.
Why would you do this to me?
I have a lot of problems with Mass Effect,
but chief among them is someone decided the story
would only be sufficiently epic
if the Commander Shepard took frequent breaks
to play Cylindrical Frogger.
["Minecraft Theme Song"]
♪♪
You don't even know what this game is, do you?
You and me, we're friends, right?
So I can trust you with this.
I have the pet theory that all hacking minigames are bad
even when they're good.
Hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo!
I can't wait to justify this.
Some of these minigames are kind of fun to do,
especially the one in Brigand, Oaxaca.
I couldn't resist not telling you what it was.
My problem is that when you have to do them a lot,
they start to really distract from the game
you want to actually be playing.
This isn't a recent trend that started after Deus Ex.
It's a constant in gaming history that Deus Ex avoided.
Many of the game's developers used to work
at Looking Glass Studios,
the company that produced System Shock 1 and 2.
1999's System Shock 2 has a hacking minigame in it,
and it's a fine minigame,
but the problem is it isn't fine a hundred times.
System Shock 2 is only a groundbreaking
survival horror RPG set on a cool space station
some of the time.
A lot of the time, System Shock 2
is a simplistic puzzle game
you play in the corner of your screen.
Hacking minigames were already a thing in 1999,
and they were already pretty clearly not the best idea.
The Deus Ex team didn't forget to add a hacking minigame.
They chose not to make hacking a repetitive chore.
Every one of these minigames wastes way,
way more of your precious human time on Earth
than Deus Ex ever did.
By the end of any of these games,
you're begging to be able to just press a button
and wait a few seconds to hack something.
["Hacking Minigame"]
Holy shit. Holy shit.
They made it so there's no hacking minigame.
Oh, my God. I love this game.
Human Revolution's developers were making a prequel
to the game that got it right,
which is why it's such a shame they decided
the original's hacking was a mistake that needed fixing.
["Hacking Minigame"]
This is fine. It's just a lot of clicking on stuff,
but hey, you feel more active, right?
["Hacking Minigame"]
You're clicking on stuff.
["Hacking Minigame"]
That's gameplay.
["Hacking Minigame"]
Hacking also grants experience points,
which means, oh, no, if you're trying to get
as many experience points as possible,
that means even when you have the password
to a computer, you'll be hacking it anyway.
Have fun, completionists.
The smart thing to do would be to just give players
the same experience points for if they knew the password.
Mankind Divided actually does this.
Thanks, guys. Now I don't have to play
as much of the same fucking minigame
because they didn't change it.
In his talk, Lapikus says during development
this minigame was feature complete in under two weeks.
It took two weeks before anything else in the game.
I think two years before we should.
Hacking was done and we were playing it.
If you've played this game all the way through,
it is genuinely possible you've spent more time
playing the hacking minigame than any
of the developers did making it.
Not that that's really a bad thing though.
Minigames are at risk of being a sunk cost feature.
You could easily waste ages trying to make
this slightly more fun,
and I'm glad they spent the time elsewhere.
My point is they should have put even less time
into it and not made it.
A slide in Lapikus' presentation
describes the hacking philosophy
which outlines the need to create tension
and make the player feel more active,
but there's one extra thing on the list
that's really troubling.
Hacking must be central to the game's progression
at some key moments in the game.
Oh, no. So remember when I said in Deus Ex
even if you hated the hacking, it was optional?
Turns out that was a mistake too.
Hacking is now mandatory.
The player sometimes has no alternative solutions
but to play this minigame,
and I'm genuinely not sure why.
Were they that proud of it?
Why take away the player's ability
to choose how to progress?
Being mandatory actually makes the hacking worse too
because now the developers have to account
for the possibility players were really bad at hacking
or hadn't put any of their skill points
into the ability to hack higher level terminals.
Which means all the mandatory ones
are incredibly low level and easy.
So sure, this means if you hate hacking,
it's never challenging when you're forced to do it,
but it also means players who put their points
into hacking are never tested
on any of the important terminals of the game.
There's a section partway through where the player
has to hack the computer of that master hacker from before.
I love computers. This computer belongs to the guy
who brain jacked someone and made them jack their brain
right in front of you.
He's so advanced, the biggest tech company
in the world hired him to do it.
He's had a secret backdoor into your company's computers
for like a year.
However, this master hacker's computer
is plot important, so it's level one
and easy to get into and his computer's covered
in the extra hacking viruses to help you out just in case.
There isn't even a password you can find
if you explore or search other areas.
You have to hack.
Also sure, the forever alone meme.
That'll age well.
You'll notice I said meme and not in-joke.
What if this master hacker's computer
was really high level and if you hadn't invested in hacking,
you needed to go on a cool side quest
to learn the password or explore his apartment to find it?
Or what if you just couldn't get into it
and had to follow up on other leads to find the hacker?
You want players to feel like they gained something
from specializing, not that they wasted their time.
In the original, there's a section where you need
to acquire the password to a computer
and it's deep in a basement full of lasers and traps
and explosives and turrets,
but if you invested in hacking,
you can just hack the computer.
Giving the player choices based on what sort
of character they've made is kind of
the whole point of RPGs.
If the game was either a forced search
for a password in a basement or a forced hacking sequence,
it would lose a lot of its value as gameplay,
but no, you see, hacking must be central
to the game's progression.
Why though? The game does reward you
for investing in hacking sometimes.
Off the beaten track are high level terminals
that lead to extra stuff and in missions,
there's often security equipment
that let you turn off cameras,
commandeer turrets, and even combat robots
when the level designers remember to put them in.
I think it feels a bit less special
that everyone else is doing half the hacking you do anyway,
but it still works out to be pretty fun.
One of my favorite things to do in Human Revolution
is if you have the ability to hack turrets
and the strength upgrade,
you can pick up turrets and carry them around
while they destroy everyone in your path.
It's fantastic.
It feels amazing being rewarded
for combining these two abilities.
This stuff is great.
The part of this transaction I don't like
is how many times I had to play competitive
join the dots to get here.
It's not just that the hacking is a huge waste of time.
It's that they deliberately made their game
more of a waste of time than the original
with the specific intent of making the player
feel like they're doing more,
and yeah, you are doing more,
but more busy work does not equal more fun,
and this idea has gone unquestioned for so long
that it was a genuine shock
when the recent death loop removed it
or when Bioshock 2 removed it
and added a separate weapon
that triggered a different minigame
that was shorter and simpler
and actually impacted the gameplay
Is it just me or is Bioshock 2 the best one
by a really wide margin?
Like, it's not even close.
All right, all right, I have to stop.
My heart can't take it.
The hacking chapter is over.
We're safe. We're alive. It's gone.
Let's move to yellower pastures.
♪♪
The smart lockpick is always handy.
The original game also had mechanics
for lockpicking to deal with locks
and electronics for bypassing other devices
that can't be hacked like power boxes and stuff,
but hey, if you squint,
they're a bit passive too, aren't they?
You just sit there and use your item on them.
How did the Human Revolution team update these mechanics?
They replaced them with the fucking hacking minigame!
♪♪
That's right! There's three times as much hacking
as you thought there was going to be.
To get into people's houses,
you don't need to find, you know, a fucking key.
Like how doors work.
You hack the convenient terminal
in front of everybody's door
or if you're lucky, you can find the code for it somewhere.
The concept of keys doesn't exist
in the world of Human Revolution.
Now that's streamlining.
In the original, hacking, lockpicking,
and electronics were all separate skills
you could invest in with different effects on the world.
All of this being the same minigame
makes it all feel like you're doing
the same thing over and over
and it feels like that because you are.
Using a multi-tool that's tied into your proficiency
with a skill to turn off a laser grid, that's cool,
but what if instead it was a minigame
that took 24 seconds to do?
Oh, yeah, I'd love that.
Just squeeze that right into my mouth.
Actually, no, we're not playing that in fast forward.
You're watching all of this with me.
I've got a magazine here.
Man, there's a full page ad here
for Mark Kermode's film review.
I like that guy. I disagree with him
like 90% of the time,
but I'll know if I like a movie based on what he says,
so I think that makes him a good critic, right?
Oh, it's over.
Now, go watch that 150 times
and then tell me that this is good.
Quite a few more people have the achievement
for hacking 50 devices than for beating the second boss
a bit past the halfway point.
I can't help but wonder if the hacking is a factor
in why people stopped playing.
Apparently, one company
manufactures everybody's locks now.
That must be where the Illuminati get all the money
for their secret science bases.
Based on how you played it,
Deus Ex was a lot of different things
to a lot of people.
Now a bunch of it is unavoidably hacking.
For everyone, and that is worse.
None of this stuff is a deal breaker, of course.
The game's still pretty good.
I just think it really sucks how many choices
have been actively removed from the game,
but that's not what the developers were focused on.
By their own admission, they focused on the combat.
♪♪
The first thing most people notice
about the original Deus Ex
is that shooting is fairly complicated and weird.
Weapons are pretty powerful.
Headshots with almost any weapon are lethal,
but they require skill point investments to use properly.
At lower levels, they reload slower,
are less effective, and take ages to aim.
This kind of odd aiming system wasn't an accident.
This was deliberately added
onto the Unreal Tournament engine.
Yeah, it's not a very good first-person shooter,
but it's also not trying to be one.
It's trying to be an RPG
where shooting is a skill you have to invest in.
Combat being something difficult to execute
is an important part of the design.
I'll explain what I mean by referring
to another famous immersive sim, Thief.
Thief is a stealth game,
but you can pull out a sword if you want,
and there's a pretty in-depth sword fighting system in there,
but as soon as you fight more than one person at once
or an undead warrior or a wizard,
you're basically dead.
The point is combat is a bad situation you should avoid.
Ah!
Thief's sneaking is fun because you know you're dead
if you get seen by a bunch of people.
On the higher difficulties,
killing someone gives you a game over.
It wouldn't be as fun if you could cut
six people's heads off in five seconds
and, oh, what's this dishonored footage doing here?
Warren Spector worked at Looking Glass
while they were making Thief and remembers being annoyed
he couldn't just fight enemies if he wanted,
and in his talk, he actually describes
learning this exact lesson.
I came to a place that was just too hard for me to sneak,
and I asked the team,
just make me tough enough that I can fight my way
past these guards because I'm getting killed every time,
and they said no.
If we made the player character strong enough to fight,
no one would ever sneak,
and the idea of the game was to sneak,
and they're probably right for Thief.
That was probably the right decision to make.
He describes Deus Ex as a game
trying to be a bit more balanced than Thief.
I made a vow right then that I was gonna make a game
that lets you fight or sneak, uh, as you chose.
It wants to let you do combat if you want to
and make it satisfying to win
but also retain the fun of avoiding it if you can
by making combat something that's hard
if you're not invested in it.
This means sneaking or using exploration
or talking to people or hacking the enemy's robots
and letting them mess them up for you is rewarding.
Right before we shipped, I put my head down on my desk,
and I just said,
if people get that you can fight, sneak, or talk,
we're gonna rule the world.
If people compare our combat to Half-Life, we're dead.
For the Human Revolution team,
modernizing the combat was their highest priority.
Lapicus's talk has a chart showing what they spent
the most time and resources on.
As we decided that combat would be where we would put
most of our time, energy, and resources.
They knew they could handily outdo the original on combat,
so they really put their minds to it,
and the combat in Human Revolution is really good.
Bullets hurt a lot, so fights are punishing
when you get hit, and they're satisfying to win
because you almost died.
I thought I would hate that they added
cover shooting to Deus Ex,
but it's executed really well.
Wee. There's no huge gauntlets.
Every shootout is its own landscape
with enemies trying to flank and flush you out
with grenades once a fight starts.
There's none of the busy work you get in
with other shooters where you just, like,
kill a lot of people so you have something to do
on your way to the next level.
When you do fight, the fight is unique
and specific to that area and the type of
and amount of enemies.
That said, there is one aspect of the combat
that's not very good. Let's talk about melee.
Deus Ex had a wide variety of lethal
and non-lethal choices for hand-to-hand combat
from police batons to riot prods,
knives, and crowbars.
Then when you got to China, you could find a sword
and have a flipping sword, which was cool,
and later you found a gosh darn lightsaber.
Well, a sword made of tiny nanomachines
arranging in the shape of a sword,
but look at it. Human revolution
streamlined melee weapons by removing them.
No, really, there's no melee weapons in Deus Ex anymore.
You can't pull out a stick and swing it at someone.
It's all guns all the time.
It's like me at the gym.
There's baseball bats lying around,
but hell, if anyone uses them,
no one can even pick it up.
That shit must be heavy.
Grenades can't even move it.
Instead, you perform melee combat
by pressing a button, and if you have enough energy,
a cinematic plays depicting Jensen
taking the person out, lethally or non-lethally
based on whether you held the button down.
They simplified the melee combat so much
they moved it out of the game and into a cut scene.
Cut scene Jensen rides again.
He gets to have fun with his arm swords,
and you don't.
Ah!
♪ ♪
It's an incredibly clunky thing to have to do
every time you do close-range combat.
Some of these look pretty fun the first few times,
but like with hacking, it's not fun the many times
you end up doing it in the game.
♪ Hello, darkness ♪
It's utterly flow-breaking.
Just let me hit someone with a stick, damn it.
The idea you're doing this every time
instead of ever being able to do something as simple
as whip out a crowbar is mind baffling.
I meant to say boggling.
Boggling. I just realized what a great word that is.
The takedowns cost a full bar of energy to use
and can't be used unless you use a consumable item
or the bar recovers,
which means I get to quote my favorite line
from a game review ever,
that's right, your knife requires ammo.
That's right, your knife requires ammo.
Melee combat costing ammunition
is a mechanic from Vampire Reign,
a game almost universally recognized
as one of the worst ever,
a perfect place to draw inspiration from
for your new Deus Ex game.
Here's how melee combat works in Deus Ex now.
["Metal Gear Solid 3 Theme"]
["Metal Gear Solid 3 Theme"]
["Metal Gear Solid 3 Theme"]
When it comes to the shooting, which is all that's left,
the RPG mechanics of the original
have been completely removed.
Adam has perfect aim with almost every weapon
at the start of the game,
especially if you use the sights,
and while there are augmentations
that reduce recoil,
the recoil you start with
is pretty easy to handle,
and this is good.
It means combat is more a test
of the player's skill than their character's stats,
and for something as visceral as a shootout,
I think that works.
Come on, man, don't tell me this doesn't look fun.
Do not tell me this doesn't look fun.
I have been lied to before,
and I am sick of the posers and fakers.
["Metal Gear Solid 3 Theme"]
["Metal Gear Solid 3 Theme"]
Someone there?
Ah!
The original game's stealth was okay.
You could lean around corners, which sounds stealthy,
but it didn't seem to help you avoid being caught.
I think we've got an intruder.
The big thing was enemies were really good
at hearing any nearby noise
that wasn't crouch-walking extremely slowly.
["Metal Gear Solid 3 Theme"]
Someone's there. I can hear you.
It never clicked how exactly
the game wanted you to be stealthy.
The stealthy weapons weren't too useful either.
The tranquilizer crossbow was silent,
but enemies were still alerted for the many seconds
it took for them to go unconscious.
["Metal Gear Solid 3 Theme"]
["Metal Gear Solid 3 Theme"]
["Metal Gear Solid 3 Theme"]
Melee from stealth sometimes knocked enemies out
and sometimes merely hurt them
and then alerted them to you.
The stun prod seemed to base its effectiveness
on how it was feeling that evening.
This was one thing that was desperate for an overhaul.
Now's a good time to tell you several
of this game's developers had previously worked
on Splinter Cell Chaos Theory,
one of the best stealth games and games of all time,
including Francois Lapikus,
making him a literal heroic genius.
I'm not normally a pure stealth guy.
I try until I get seen and then I start blasting.
I'm the sort of person Dishonored was made for.
I hope that joke earlier didn't mislead you.
I love that game, seriously,
but Human Revolution is at its most fun
when you take the stealth as seriously as you can.
The Thief games and even Splinter Cell
start to bore me after a while when I try that,
but here everything's at its most tense and careful
while never being too slow or trial or error,
and I just criticized the takedowns,
but you know what?
They're super reliable for stealth.
If you haven't been seen,
the takedown is silent and stealthy
and there's no chance of it not knocking out the enemy
like you thought it would.
This is kinda how Chaos Theory worked,
using takedowns instead of typical melee.
It was always an instant kill or knockout.
You just had to get in close enough to do it,
which explains why they did it the way they did here.
Sam Fisher's Sleepy Slappers didn't need ammunition, though,
and the takedown wasn't a long animation
that took away your control,
but at least the game's weird melee system
starts to make sense when you consider
the creators' design chops
and what delicious chops they were.
God, this is such a good game.
I'm so happy I got to bring this up.
♪♪
The AI in Human Revolution is really fun to hide from
in almost exactly the same way Chaos Theory was.
They'll hear you if you run and see you immediately
if you're out in the open,
but if you're crouch-walking,
you pretty reliably can't be heard,
and you can even get away with falling a short distance now.
You can hide in enemies' peripheral vision
in ways that are maybe a little unrealistic
but feel great to get away with.
The third-person cover mode functions
as a perfected version of the original's peaking.
It's kind of hilarious that they literally went on record
that combat was the most important thing,
but while they were at it, they just casually tossed in
one of the best stealth experiences
this side of Dishonored,
but the developers had designed themselves into a corner.
They'd made a game that featured
a fantastic stealth experience
and then given players a bunch of guns,
removed the limitations on shooting
that made it less viable in the original,
and then bolted third-person cover shooting mechanics
onto their first-person game just to make sure
you could shoot people any way you wanted.
Remember what I said about games like Deus Ex
being sums of parts?
You can't make a game like Deus Ex more like a shooter
without inevitably making it less like Deus Ex.
The balance of which mechanics you rely on
to survive has shifted.
Shooting has become the most viable solution
to most problems when in the original,
it was the least viable solution,
and that made it fun to avoid
or to really lean into and get good at.
You could spend a long time memorizing these patrols,
learning to meticulously sneak between cover,
put all your augmentation points into cloaking
or running silently, and have to be very careful
whenever you need to come back through this room
because they're all still here,
or you can click on four guys
and not have to worry about them ever again.
♪♪
Since shooting people is extremely simple and fun,
it becomes the dominant strategy,
the thing you're incentivized to do to solve your problems.
This threatens to ruin all of the other mechanics.
Why use stealth when everyone's dead
and the fights that happen when people see you are fun?
Why bother hacking a terminal to turn off cameras
or turn turrets against their owners
when you shot all the owners when you came in?
Who are the cameras even gonna send after me
when they see me? Everybody's dead, Dave.
But you'll notice I said threatens there
because the developers were clever
and they noticed this possibility too
during playtesting.
They'd worked really hard designing fairly complex levels
with multiple paths and solutions
and then testers clicked on the bad men
until they died and walked to the next objective.
It was a total failure.
Playtests showed us that people were just gunning everything
and they weren't thinking. It was just a huge frag fest.
So to fix this,
they came up with a really clever solution.
♪♪
Sure, shooting would solve everything,
but to correct for it,
the game is astonishingly stingy with ammo.
Ammunition pickups you can find lying around in levels
usually amount to a handful of bullets apiece,
and for more specialized weapons like the tranquilizer rifle,
you're lucky to find two or three,
which is accurate. I only keep a couple
of tranquilizer darts in my office too.
Enemies have been meticulously designed
to be almost a waste of bullets
if you try fighting them like in a normal shooter.
They drop their weapons,
which have a couple bullets in them,
and sometimes there's a few more on their bodies.
If you're not being really precise with your shots,
you can easily end with less ammo than you started.
This was a super smart choice.
It means there's much more pressure
to make your shots count or, more importantly,
to avoid wasting bullets fighting in the first place.
This tremendously alters how the player relates to the world.
Sure, you could just shoot all these guys
like I said before, but that would actually make
your life harder in the next fight.
See what I mean?
Scarcity of resources recontextualizes
what would otherwise be a fairly simple situation.
Sure, you can take a bunch of guys out with a grenade,
but you have, like, two grenades.
You might need those.
The end result is like playing
a fairly simple cover shooter
while being lightly choked from behind by a game designer.
Even when it's straightforward,
it's still a little tense, and that's what makes it fun.
Adam Jensen is a deadly shadow on the battlefield
who can dish it out, but only in small portions,
and if he's not careful, he won't have room for dessert.
I'm not kidding how seriously these guys took
the balancing of resources.
In Lapicus's talk, he shows photographs
of huge bulletin boards they made
to track all the weapons, ammunition,
and items a player could find in the levels.
We used these balance boards to get a sense
of everything that was in the game.
This is about half the boards we had.
We had six in total.
And tried to make sure they were never too powerful,
never had enough stuff,
so a big fight would always cost them.
During playtests, people would complain.
They would say, well, I don't have enough ammo
to kill everybody, but then again,
that's exactly what we wanted.
Chris Rock was right.
Sometimes what you need is bullet control,
so the core experience works out really well.
There's this fantastic primary loop
of carefully avoiding enemies,
stealthily taking out the ones you can
with takedowns or silenced weapons to preserve ammo,
hoping to thin the crowd before a big fight starts,
building up enough ammunition that you can afford
to get in fights when you do get caught,
the occasional inevitable explosions of violence,
and the careful picking clean of the bodies at the end.
There's a rhythm to it that feels excellent.
If you want an FPS RPG whose FPS component
is some genuinely good shooting
that doesn't invalidate stealth and hacking
and other alternative solutions,
Human Revolution is basically the game for you.
However, as Deus Ex used to like pointing out,
these choices have consequences.
Say you like the tranquilizer rifle.
It's silent and non-lethal and has a decent range.
It has basically no weaknesses except it's a bit slow.
So in a normal game, the bullets would be expensive,
but that would be your choice to make, right?
Well, not here because if you can buy
all the tranq rifle rounds you want,
the game would be too easy.
Instead, the local weapon store
will sell you five packs of two,
and those ten darts will have to last you a while
because the other store in Detroit doesn't sell any.
You'll have to go all the way to China
to find someone else willing to sell these to you.
This is a good choice.
Giving the player too much ammo for the best weapon
would ruin the tension and make things way too easy,
but on a simpler level, it's incredibly annoying
to not be allowed to buy ammo
for the weapon you like to use.
This is one of the trade-offs this design has to make.
It works, but in a way that might be
a little bit annoying for some types of player
who thought they could spend the money they were saving
on things they wanted or expected one of the two weapons
they can fit in their inventory to have enough ammo
available to make it useful.
There are also limb clinics where you can buy
praxis points, so I mean, if you want more,
you can look around for more credits to buy more
and maybe sell the weapons and ammo you aren't using, right?
You know, like a fun video game would do
if it wanted to give you interesting decisions to make.
The billboard says no.
Limb clinics will sell you two praxis points.
The scarcity starts to feel really weird
if you think too hard about it or try to circumvent it.
What's that? You think you can get the upper hand
by knocking out a bunch of well-armed policemen
with assault rifles and get a couple more bullets
to get an edge at the start of the game?
Nice try. Those cops aren't carrying any ammo on them
and their guns had three bullets in them.
No, not each. Between both of them.
In a fight, NPCs have infinite bullets.
The game keeps track of how many shots they've fired,
not so it can give you their remaining ammo,
so avoiding fighting and taking them out
gives you a bigger reward, but to keep track
of when they need to reload.
I don't know. This is starting to feel
a little bit artificial.
Lots of areas have weapons lying around sort of as props,
populating some of the pretty sparse
office and apartment areas.
Almost all of these have exactly one bullet in them.
There's something extremely disconcerting
about a world full of people who keep a gun on their desk
with one bullet in it.
This sort of thing starts to really affect
how exploration feels.
Remember, these guys had a big billboard on the wall
keeping track of every bullet in the game
after seeing what playtesters did
when they gave them too much,
so if you're exploring every nook and cranny,
opening every locker, looking in bathrooms
and behind boxes and so on,
there will be rewards for exploring,
but the billboard said if you get too much stuff,
it won't be tense anymore,
so the main reward is going to be, like,
five more bullets.
The game will throw a massive room
full of, like, 50 lockers at you,
and there'll be, like, four pickups in total
amounting to one full clip of ammo for one gun
and a third of a clip for another
and maybe a grenade,
and the lockers only open halfway,
so you gotta really peek in there
to make sure you see everything.
Oh, and because it's this game,
none of the lockers are locked
because locks don't exist anymore.
Even the most daring heists in the game
start to feel kind of pointless.
In the Detroit level, you can break into the armory
of a police station.
A police station armory.
An American police station armory.
I've seen their budgets.
That sounds like pay dirt.
Access granted.
♪ ♪
Prepare for the cornucopia.
I hope you're ready for two stun grenades
and a template that can turn one of them into a mine
and an assault rifle with 15 bullets to go with it.
That's less than a full clip of rifle ammo.
Is that a clip or a magazine?
I don't know, and I'm too hopped up
on all this sweet loot to care.
Oh, boy, a shotgun and five shells to go with it
and a completely new gun that stuns enemies briefly
that you don't have room for
and four shots for it if you could.
Oh, and a rate of fire upgrade
so you can fire the bullets you don't have faster.
You can really feel how contrived the Scarcity's.
Scarcity? Scarcity? I don't even know how to say it.
Like, they put all these ammo pickups on the table
so it feels like you're getting a big horde of stuff,
but it's actually just several small boxes
with two and three bullets in them.
Think about why they deliberately did that for a second.
They could have just put one box
with 15 bullets in it next to the gun,
but then players would understand
how little stuff they were being given for this.
If I gave you five quality streets
and not even any green triangles,
you'd think I was ruining Christmas,
but if I gave it to you in the form of two boxes
for a few minutes, I'd be the best uncle ever.
I get to write these off as a business expense now.
Knowing now what the reward for this adventure was,
let's all go watch the hacking minigame
I had to do to get this.
["This is what you get for demanding the truth."
No, I'm serious. I'm doing it again.
There's actually a couple of NPC guards
who are, like, talking about how cool the Peps is
in the hallway of the police station,
and when you get it, you get four shots for it,
and it kind of sucks.
It sucks so bad it doesn't even come back in the sequel.
They make it like an augmentation or something.
I didn't pick up the Peps here,
but I did hoard all the ammo I could
over the course of the whole game,
so I got a good 15 shots in the last level.
Okay, I'm done with my Peps talk.
I promise I won't do this again.
I always thought it was strange how Sandoval
sadly and slowly takes out a revolver,
and the implication is pretty clear, right?
We know what he's planning,
but then he also takes out a single bullet
to put in the gun.
First off, Sandy, it's this game.
The gun already had one bullet in it,
but if you talk him down, he puts the gun on the desk,
and you can pick it up,
and of course it has one bullet in it,
and if he does shoot himself,
you can still pick up the gun,
but of course it doesn't have five?
Five bullets? Fuck this fucking game!
It's not just having too many bullets
that would make you overpowered.
It's having weapons that are too powerful in general.
The game has two really powerful weapons,
the laser rifle and the plasma rifle.
Both of these weapons deal immense amounts of damage
really quickly and can melt any enemy practically instantly.
♪ ♪
Jesus Christ!
♪ ♪
The laser rifle can even shoot through walls,
allowing you to kill the final boss
the second the fight starts
from behind her bulletproof glass,
which is pretty clever.
Giving these to the player would make combat far too easy
and once again ruin the game's tension.
Even giving them next to no ammo
would still make the weapon ridiculous in fights,
so how did they balance these weapons?
The first time you find the laser rifle
is behind Tong during your second visit to China,
very close to the end of the game.
This gives you roughly two levels
to use it against regular enemies
before the last level, which is against basically zombies
who don't even have guns
and are easy to deal with with any weapon.
♪ ♪
Ah! Ah! Ah!
Ah! Ah!
Bonk! Bonk!
Ah! Bonk! Bonk!
Ah! Ah! Ah!
Just let me finish! Just let me finish!
Oh, boy, I'm so glad they gave me
the laser rifle in time for this.
The plasma rifle can be first found
being wielded by the third boss,
which is fine, you know,
getting a cool weapon off a boss is a fun reward.
Unfortunately, he's also the last actual fucking enemy
you fight in the entire game.
After fighting him, you go right to the zombie level.
Ah! He's got a gun!
You're gonna scare me! You're not even there!
Get away! Go!
I didn't want this!
Ah! Ah! Ah!
♪ ♪
So essentially, they balanced these weapons
by giving them to you when the game is over.
It seems like they designed these weapons
much earlier on than did the playtesting
and realized how much their reliance on combat
broke the game's feel and they had to lean on scarcity
and went, well, we made these.
We should put them somewhere and put them right at the end.
So, hey, they're in the game,
so you can say there's a bunch of weapons in there.
I would say without going too specific in the numbers,
I would say we're around 20 or so, uh,
different, uh, uh, uh, weapons.
That's a great number.
This is kind of true.
If you add all the weapons,
including the ones you don't get to use
until the last five minutes,
and count grenades as weapons,
there's 20 weapons in Human Revolution.
The game's launch trailer features a shot of Jensen
using the plasma rifle against a security robot
in a much earlier section of the game
during the first visit to China,
hours and hours before the player ever gets one.
I'm not saying, like,
this game's launch trailer lied to me.
It's more that I think these comments
and bits of pre-release footage
are a fascinating look into the kinds
of tough design choices that come up
during game development.
This next thing's been stuck in my craw
for literally a full decade.
In an interview with Eurogamer,
the game's director, Jean-Francois Degas,
made a really enlightening statement,
and I'm not saying that sarcastically.
It genuinely is.
I've obsessed about it for 10 years.
What is wrong with me?
The laser rifle looks like fun.
How does it work?
It is a weapon.
Sorry.
It is a weapon that allows you to shoot through walls,
so you just have to shoot, really.
Combined with the smart vision,
e.g. through through walls,
it makes for deadly combo.
However, I'm telling you right away,
it's a very difficult weapon to get.
You can see why this is such a meaningful statement.
I'm sure Degas wouldn't say that
while intending for the rifle to be something
you get lying against a wall
right before the last couple of levels.
We're going full speculation ops here.
I could be reading way too much into this,
but it sounds like in the nearly a year
between this interview and the release of the game,
the design got altered.
Maybe the laser rifle was balanced
by making it a reward for some difficult challenge
like a daring heist in a police station or something,
but then they did more playtesting
and noticed that even when the weapon was hard to get
and had limited ammo,
it ruined the entire feel of the game.
Stealth, conservation of resources,
hell, even the basic flow of combat
gets irrevocably changed when a player gets
the shoot through walls instant murder beam,
so they must have made the tough decision
of turning it into an extremely late game weapon
so at the very least it couldn't mess
with the rest of the game's pace.
This points to just how devoted they were
to making the central mechanics feel good.
It's obviously really important for the game
that it's not incredibly easy to defeat enemies.
They designed several powerful weapons
that were fun to play with,
but then cut them out of most of the game
in the name of making sure the core gameplay
could live its best life.
Unfortunately, and it pains me to do this,
after all this time going into detail
about some really clever design choices,
we now have to talk about how they kind of ruined them.
♪♪
You know how I've been really hitting you over the head
with how important scarcity was?
Well, in his talk, Lapicus was also doing that.
-"Dare Sex?" is a game about scarcity of resources.
Oh, that's why I keep pronouncing it like that.
If we give you everything,
you're not gonna think anymore.
You're just gonna go and use the simple route.
It's fun for players to be rewarded for their choices
or to be made to deal with problems caused by them.
The original does this too,
not to the same degree with ammunition,
but because you needed lockpicks,
multi-tools, augmentation canisters,
medkits, skill points,
and other useful items to progress,
you're always hurting for something,
and speaking of hurting,
even damage was part of this puzzle.
J.C. Denton had locational limb damage,
a bit like in Fallout.
Damaged limbs affected his aiming and his movement.
If you broke your legs, you had to crawl around
to find a medkit.
This meant combat was extremely tense.
You had to manage its effects on your body.
Medkits didn't just bring back health.
They had to be used on a specific body part
to mitigate the effects of the damage.
Without medkits and the skill
that makes them more effective,
you were in trouble,
and the robots that healed you for free
were few and far between.
This meant combat and taking damage in general
had genuine stakes to it.
-"Denton. Hey, it's Denton."
Oh.
Lucky there's a clinic nearby.
-"Have you looked at any other options?
Euthanasia is one sure way to relieve suffering."
-"Uh, Chinese herbal nonsense is for twinks.
I want real medicine."
Human Revolution removed
locational limb damage completely
and replaced it with a simple health bar,
which isn't the worst idea,
and I know that because then they had the worst idea
and went a step further and removed damage.
If you haven't been shot for a few seconds,
your health just comes back.
It seems like when they were looking
at other popular shooters of the day
for inspiration for how to improve Deus Ex's combat,
some wires got crossed and they borrowed
their regenerating health mechanics too,
mechanics which are great
for combat-centric action shooters
and terrible for ones where getting shot
is supposed to matter.
One of the most important facets of combat in Deus Ex,
the consequences of combat, is just gone.
If you got shot in a fight in Deus Ex,
it was an extra complication you had to deal with.
It didn't just go away.
It was an added incentive to make smarter choices
than getting into a straight shootout.
Even if you killed everyone first,
if they shot you, it was a problem
you still had to deal with.
It made the janky combat fun to put stats in
so that you did well in it
or to avoid completely using stealth or explosives.
Regenerating health messes with the core concept
of choices having consequences.
Now, once everyone's dead, your health will come back
while you're checking their bodies.
You'd think a game that wanted to instill tension
about survival and make combat's effects matter,
for example, by making said bodies
have two bullets on them,
would avoid misusing
regeneration mechanics like this.
Human Revolution's combat doesn't get to be
as engaging as it easily could have been
because of this boneheaded idea.
The choice to remove consequences from combat
cuts off the game's potential at its knees,
something you also can't do anymore.
If you really want to balance combat
against stealth and hacking
and other alternative solutions,
maybe make taking damage a problem.
You could basically flip a switch,
turn off regenerating health,
and instantly make the entire game
a much more fascinating puzzle.
Make all of its combat that much more engaging,
more of an obstacle.
Since all of its effects would become cumulative,
so many more players would be making fun decisions
about how to engage in them or how to avoid them,
and healing items would matter again,
which they don't in Human Revolution
because your health returns to maximum on its own.
Why do you even have these in here?
Oh, they put you slightly over your maximum health.
Great. These items would have value
in a world where you didn't just get all your health back?
Jesus Christ. This affects energy too.
In the original and Invisible War,
you required energy to use augmentations.
This made energy cells into a valuable resource,
and it's clear in this game that someone
had their head screwed on properly
and wanted them to be like that here too
because there's candy bars everywhere
that refill one or more batteries of energy,
but whoever that genius was,
someone bashed his head in and went to work in his clothes
and decided to make energy also refill on its own.
The candy's useful if you want to do multiple takedowns
in quick succession or really like using
the cloaking device for long periods,
but the fact you have practically infinite energy
as long as you're willing to wait a second
means there's no real economy to using augmentations.
The health and energy pickups feel like
vestigial remains of a much more engaging version
of this game where these things mattered.
I think this stuff is a bit of a shame,
but bear in mind it's not that bad.
The core experience still works really well so far.
Sure, the scarcity can be a little annoying.
The police forgot to bring bullets
to a hostage situation or out on patrol or back at base.
Your boss can only afford to give you one gun.
He's a millionaire, but the store would only sell him
seven darts for the tranquilizer gun you asked for,
and two of the coolest guns in the game
don't fucking exist.
Oh, but thanks to my acts of heroism,
I have a very slight discount on those stun gun darts
I can buy literally six of.
Yeah, that really helps. Thank you.
But at least the intended effect works.
You're making careful choices.
You're having fun.
Then you find a rocket launcher hidden in gang territory
with two rockets.
If you're in a fight with a large group
or a big robot, this can change everything,
but you can only fit it in your inventory
if you throw a bunch of other stuff away.
This is a great little decision
to offer the player in a game like this.
You have to make a tactical decision
and become even weaker in regular fights
in the hopes of having an edge in a big one.
Moments like this are the secret
to what makes these games fun,
feeling confronted with possibilities
and what to do about them.
If there's a key Deus Ex thing you have to nail,
it's this.
Does the player feel a little bit nervous
when they find a cool weapon they don't have room for?
Then a level or so later,
you're sneaking into a secret base,
and there's a huge robot in the way.
Normally, you'd be in trouble here
and have to run and hide,
but because of the consequences
of your cool decision, you don't have to.
This is your reward for good planning.
["Dead Man's Lair"]
["Dead Man's Lair"]
["Dead Man's Lair"]
["Dead Man's Lair"]
["Dead Man's Lair"]
["Dead Man's Lair"]
["Dead Man's Lair"]
["Dead Man's Lair"]
["Dead Man's Lair"]
["Dead Man's Lair"]
["Dead Man's Lair"]
Choice and consequences.
That's the beating heart of Deus Ex.
Well, it should be.
You see, I lied.
I didn't use this rocket launcher I found.
I got this one from right here,
sitting right next to the fucking robot.
The developers almost made a game
with decisions and consequences,
and then they didn't.
They made a game that handholds you
through every obstacle.
Robots are also easily destroyed by EMP grenades.
Having to save your EMP grenades for tough situations
would make them really rewarding to use, wouldn't it?
But what if people forgot to bring any
and wanted to use one on the robot?
So they put one directly in front of you
as soon as you entered the room.
This...fucking sucks.
There's no other way of saying it.
They fucked up.
It's obviously really important for the game
that it's not incredibly easy to defeat enemies.
If we give you everything,
you're not gonna think anymore.
Not only is this room just not a challenge,
you gain access to a means of instantly killing this robot
the literal actual moment you enter the room
In this instant,
players will realize their choices don't matter.
If you saved that rocket launcher,
you wasted your time, effort, and inventory space.
You were a sucker who thought they were going
to experience some kind of reward or punishment
for your decision making, but you never will.
This goes on for the entire game.
The next time you fight these robots,
the rocket launcher's right fucking there.
The EMP grenades are right there.
People complained about the boss fights
being just shooting focused and therefore a problem
for players who focused on stealth,
but that's just not true.
Every boss fight takes place
in an ocean of weapons and ammo
so the player can't possibly get stuck.
All the stuff I said was fun is still fun,
but the most important moments,
the peaks of the mountain of risk and reward,
have been eliminated.
Mummy bird chewed your dinner for you.
Open wide.
If you're going to give me the solution
to any interesting problem the instant I enter the room,
you might as well have made this a cut scene too.
Energy unlocked.
Self-destruct sequence.
Let me give you an example
of how this is supposed to work.
Resident Evil 4.
In Resident Evil 4, you can find a rocket launcher.
Just one, though.
Additional launchers cost a ton of the cash
you could have spent upgrading your weapons,
so while they were powerful
and let you practically skip bosses,
they required a meaningful sacrifice by the player,
throwing all that money away,
and to even carry a launcher,
you gave up a ton of space for one shot
that was gone once you used it.
Even looking at the rocket launcher
in my inventory gives me tingles,
and staring at it in the store is tantalizing
because it's a choice with meaningful consequences
that doesn't condescend to the player's intelligence
by giving them one anyway the instant they walk
into a room with a boss.
You might also notice that your health
doesn't regenerate in Resident Evil either
because that would be fucking stupid, wouldn't it?
Deus Ex worked along a similar principle.
The GEP gun was a huge inventory hog.
You had to leave so many useful items
lying where you found them and know you'd be in trouble
if you needed a rebreather or some stealth camo,
but it made fighting mechs a breeze,
and in a pinch, it saved you a few lockpicks.
That trade-off was so satisfying.
I'm trying to imagine a version of this game
where they just put a GEP gun on the floor
near every major enemy,
but I don't really need to imagine it.
Now do I? To make a Deus Ex game
where whenever you face a tough enemy,
the means of killing it is right next to it
and if it even manages to hurt you,
that health just comes back,
you have completely removed the choices,
consequences, and even most of the difficulty
from your game.
There's a version of Human Revolution
that's truly incredible
where it doesn't pull any of its punches,
where saving a rocket launcher made a huge difference,
where coping with the loss of resources
once you used them was interesting,
where getting shot actually hurt,
and they almost made that game,
and it's really kind of sad
that they made a just okay one instead
because they compromised their own design
in the moments it mattered most,
they made a game about scarcity of resources,
and then got scared not everyone would like that
and overcorrected in the other direction.
Playing Human Revolution is an exercise in learning
in real time why Deus Ex was a more management kind of game
and why simplifying everything about an experience
that's fun because it's a bit complicated is bad.
Oh, it's so rewarding.
You can stealth your way over to this panel
and hack it and disable the robots.
Wow, there's alternative solutions to that.
They fucking give you a grenade that kills them instantly.
It's incredibly fun to get to plan ahead
and decide what's important to you
and most importantly, actually see these choices play out
for better or for worse.
Nothing in Human Revolution is ever important.
All the edges have been sanded off.
It's a smooth and palatable pebble
that isn't particularly disagreeable
but slides out the other end completely undigested.
You have failed to make a game about scarcity of resources
if you put all those resources
next to the things you need them for.
At that point, you've made a game
about how thinking was a waste of time.
As soon as you realize you're going to be handed
the solution to the problem once you encounter it,
the depth of the experience drains away
before your very eyes,
and to do this after removing a bunch of the weapons
means the game is so much more dull
and devoid of stuff to play with than it could have been
in service to a scarcity that went out the window
the instant the player actually needed anything.
No, if you want to play with cool weapons,
you need to have pre-ordered the game in 2011.
No, that's not a joke. That's an order.
Get a time machine, call your local GameStop.
♪♪
Another slight wrinkle in the developers' attempts
to balance their game was the fact that...
♪♪
If you pre-ordered Human Revolution from GameStop
or Game, GameStation, or HMV in the UK...
you got the Explosive Mission Pack.
This pack lets the player start with a new type of grenade,
remote explosives that detonate
when you hold the grenade button down after throwing them,
and a bonus mission towards the end of the game
that rewards you with a new weapon.
But that's not all.
If the player bought the game from Amazon,
Best Buy, or Walmart,
they got the Tactical Enhancement Pack.
With this pack, players start with two new weapons,
a double-barreled shotgun, and a silenced sniper rifle.
If you were wondering why you couldn't use
a silencer upgrade on the sniper rifle,
it's not because that would be an unbalanced weapon
and the designers knew better.
It's because you didn't buy the game from Walmart.
The executives at Square Enix are killing us.
Their hands are around our soft, Quebec-y necks.
We're dying. Help us, please.
This pack also lets you start the game
with a ton of extra money,
which is the funniest possible thing to give people
when they have a limited amount of things
they're allowed to buy.
What the fuck?
I'll try to be, uh, as, uh, specific as I can,
meaning that I won't say too much,
uh, because the marketing guys over there
are watching over me.
They're right here.
And I feel the pressure of, uh,
being careful about what I say.
These bonuses eventually became purchasable as DLC.
After a few months, they effectively
became microtransactions.
The Explosive Mission Pack also gives the player
an automatic unlocking device,
which you can use to skip a single hacking minigame.
This gives me the opportunity to joke
that Human Revolution's hacking is so bad,
people paid actual money to skip it.
The pack's extra level is a crime
against Deus Ex canon,
which is worse than most actual crimes.
It's a mission to rescue Tong's son,
who has been kidnapped by the bad guys.
Tong's son is Tracer Tong,
one of the main characters from the first game.
It's pretty shitty they made the thing
that's probably the most related to the original plot
into a fucking pre-order bonus,
really milking the people who cared about Deus Ex.
As thanks for saving his son,
Tong gives you the grenade launcher,
a powerful and fun weapon you have two levels left to use.
This is genius right here.
As the player gets better, make the game harder.
♪ ♪
The trailer for this pre-order bonus
uses footage of the weapons in levels
you can never use it in because you get it so late.
I wouldn't go as far as to call this false advertising.
Who cares? But it's funny the most powerful weapons
are consistently given to you
after all the best spots to use them.
Fun fact, I was born and raised in West Yorkshire,
which is my way of saying when this game came out,
I was extremely poor.
I only got to play it because a French friend of mine
who really loved Deus Ex had pre-ordered it
because he wanted that DLC and I think a statue
of Adam Jensen that came with some versions of the game,
and then because he was a game critic
or worked at a related company or something,
he got given a free copy he didn't need
and he gave it to me.
So if you're watching this, thanks, Thomas.
I wouldn't have got to play this game for years otherwise.
I'm glad I finally have the opportunity to thank you
in the middle of a YouTube video a decade later.
Pre-order bonuses and the microtransactions
they later became are bad for everyone.
They're bad for players, they're bad for developers
getting made to do things they know are bad for the game,
and then having to listen to people like me
whining about it like it's their fault.
The only people who benefit
are the people this makes money for,
which means it's probably not going away anytime soon.
But at some point, you know,
games have to make money.
It is a business.
Would you like to augment your pre-order?
♪♪
♪♪
♪♪
♪♪
The boss fights are bad.
Anyway...
♪♪
The level design of Immersive Sims
is one of the most important parts.
You can have all the cool guns
and augmentations in the world,
but if that world doesn't create fun opportunities
for using them, then those tools are going to waste,
like the instant pot in the back of your cupboard right now.
You also have to find ways of making the player
engage with the levels, for example,
by giving rewards for bothering to explore.
You want constant rewards to drive players onward, okay?
You have to reward players regularly.
It's a bit of a disappointment in this department.
Half the stuff you'd normally be searching for
in a Deus Ex game isn't there to find
because scarcity was too important
to give you too many big rewards
and there are no longer multi-tools
or lockpicks to find because the newfound omnipresence
of hacking has replaced the need for them.
The main thing you'll find when you're exploring
is a couple of bullets, a meager amount of credits
which you can't spend on anything,
oh, and how can I forget,
dozens upon dozens of energy bars
which you don't need because the first battery
refills on its own, and since, like we covered earlier,
Praxis points are a kind of boring upgrade system,
there are no truly nice surprises
that incentivize further exploration.
You barely find anything in a police station armory.
You're not going to find much in the back alleys
of Detroit or Hengsha.
What is here feels a little too similar
to the original for its own good.
At a certain point,
it starts to feel like a half-hearted remake.
Like, even in shockingly small details
like how you and your pilot get intercepted
on your way to China
or how your pilot can optionally die
or how the first mission ends with you deciding
whether or not to let a terrorist leader live
and as soon as you make that choice,
the cops instantly arrive
and all the enemies in the level evaporate
and get replaced by cops
or how you fight exactly three augmented bosses
throughout the game, a big guy, a small lady,
and a guy who can turn invisible
and wields a plasma rifle
or the way the game's three main locations
are an American city, a Chinese city,
and a French city
although Human Revolution
sets its French part in Montreal
for what I assume are tax reasons
and the city environment itself got cut
so Montreal is just a large office building
you land on and then leave.
For the record, in the Q&A section of his GDC talk,
Lapicus got asked if he thought
the generally good reception of Human Revolution
was partially down to them directly recreating
a lot of the original's stuff.
It follows the original Deus Ex
almost act for act, story beat for story beat.
I'm wondering how much you feel
that contributed to the acceptance of it.
First off, I'd like to react to your comment
that the game follows the first game beat by beat.
It might be true.
It wasn't our intention.
It's not how we designed the game.
It's not how it was written.
So if that's the case, it's a coincidence.
I don't know if it's better or worse
the game was like this by accident
but that's what the game is like
so I don't know what to tell you.
It's not a huge deal that they're similar.
It's the same series,
so similarities are welcome if anything,
but a problem with, accidentally or otherwise,
making your levels a lot like the originals
is it makes what's missing stick out
like a giant robot sitting next to the weapon
that instantly kills it.
Liberty Island is a famously amazing level.
It's an entire open island with two different docks,
people to talk to to get a key to get inside if you want.
About time you sh**.
A sunken freighter full of stuff to find,
and of course an entire building
leading up into the Statue of Liberty.
This level design is ultimately
why Deus Ex is so fantastic.
It feels like an entire physical space
you can handle how you want.
Liberty Island is 12 different levels
depending on how someone plays it.
Human Revolution's levels are largely a straight line
that sometimes opens out into a larger box
you can be a little more creative in
which funnels right back into another straight line.
The first mission, the parallel with Liberty Island,
is a straight shot from the drop-off point on a rooftop
to a pickup on another rooftop
featuring bottlenecks in the form of corridors
and elevators that you're required to use
to progress with zero alternatives.
Compare and contrast the level of freedom here.
The Statue of Liberty has several ways in
from different angles including just climbing
over half the level.
To get into the warehouse, you can go in
through the front door or climb up on top
of the entrance and go in through a vent
just above the front door which comes out
into the other side of the same room.
It takes about five seconds to walk over here
if you come in from the front entrance.
There is no rear entrance,
and there's no way over this part of the level
by getting on the plant's roof
and finding another entryway.
It's immediately clear how much less freedom
the player has.
There are choices in how to navigate,
but they don't lead anywhere
particularly new or different.
The only way to progress is to traverse the level
mostly linearly, but occasionally,
you get to decide which side of the room you do it in.
The smoking gun betraying the closed-off nature
of the levels is the fact none of the windows work.
In Deus Ex 1, if a building has a window,
you can break the window and jump out.
Bang, you just invented a new exit.
In many of Human Revolution's buildings,
most of the windows are actually painted on
and you can't get out through them in any way.
In an actual immersive sim,
this would be a way in and out of the building.
That's what makes it immersive.
It feels like a building in a world.
This is just a rectangular corridor
with windows used to imply a complicated outside world
you never get to interact with.
Look at Jensen's apartment for a second.
The modern graphics definitely make it look
cooler than the original.
I love the Blade Runner light shaft thing with the blinds,
but in the original game's apartment,
you don't need to come in through the front door.
You can climb up a fire escape and come in through the window.
Jensen's apartment is designed to reference the original.
It's got a cute stash of loot hidden in a similar way,
but it doesn't seem to understand
the actual gameplay value of the original apartment's design.
The only way out is to get to the elevator,
ride it down, then walk out through the front door.
The windows are just for show.
I've heard so much praise for this game over the years,
how it's one of the best immersive sims,
a real successor to Deus Ex,
but for all the genuine improvements
and understandable mechanical changes,
the levels you're doing it in are restrictive and dull.
So much of the game is effectively a linear path
which leads to an elevator to the next linear path.
Seriously, there are so many areas
whose main objective is to get to an elevator.
There's a part in Hengsha where you do a whole level
to get to an elevator,
and then while you're in the elevator,
Pritchard calls you to give you your next objective.
Pritchard, I'm in an elevator leading to the bangoo.
Look for a second elevator once you're there.
The game is so fond of making elevators
the path to the next area that there is not one,
not two, but five sequences
where you go on a really long, slow elevator ride
and if you're lucky, something interesting
is happening out the window
or a character calls you on the phone.
Seriously, you just sit in an elevator
for a full minute for no reason multiple times.
Once would be fine to build tension
before a big boss fight or something,
but it's near constant.
You ride two different elevators
in the unskippable opening sequence alone.
♪♪♪♪
♪♪♪♪
Hey, guys, you know what feels even more passive
than hacking?
Standing in an elevator.
There's a sequence where the objective
is to trigger an elevator and then hide from
or fight enemies until it gets to you
to pick you up.
Since combat is pretty easy,
especially if you hack the turret,
enemies don't know how to handle turrets
in the slightest. It's really weird.
Everyone dies in the first five seconds,
and you're just sitting there
during what was meant to be
a tense struggle for survival.
♪♪♪♪
The funicular is halfway there, Jensen.
♪♪♪♪
Wah!
♪♪♪♪
Your ride is there, Jensen.
Get moving.
And in case you were wondering,
yes, you do then ride
the same elevator back down
to where it came from.
♪♪♪♪
I've heard the excuse this is a way
of disguising loading between areas,
but many of them last much longer
than any of the actual loading screens take,
and several of them lead directly
into a loading screen anyway,
so don't give me any of that gubbins.
It's boring, overly compartmentalized
level design however you slice it,
and excuses don't make elevators fun.
I don't think I've ever said gubbins out loud before.
That just came out of me.
I think the reason they made them like this
was for dramatic effect.
When you sit in an elevator to Upper Hengsha
for 30 actual seconds and come out
and suddenly you're at the top of a high-rise building
overlooking a new environment,
one you never get to actually visit,
you feel like you did a lot more
than walk down a linear corridor
to an elevator...twice.
Look what an expansive world we're in.
The objective of this level?
To get to the data core room
by getting to the elevator.
Then you're given a cut scene where your objective
changes to confronting Zhao Yunru,
the CEO from before, to have that cut scene.
You confront her by getting to another elevator
to her penthouse.
This elevator trip takes a full minute.
This is only the third longest eleva-
The current Human Revolution speedrun
by Rampancy is 37 minutes long.
Eight and a half minutes of the run
is spent in an elevator.
Uncomfortably close to a quarter of this speedrun
is sitting and waiting,
and this is the best-case scenario.
This guy does cool shit like skip waiting
for that one elevator by shoving himself through the door.
In fact, most of the run's cleverest tricks
involve throwing himself through the door
In fact, most of the run's cleverest tricks
involve finding ways to avoid
having to wait in an elevator even longer.
The time wasted here isn't even the real problem.
Where the original game's levels
were usually large outdoor spaces
with multiple ways in and out of the buildings
with objectives in them,
encouraging player creativity
and freedom of choice,
Human Revolution is wandering between elevators
with ornate windows overlooking
the kinds of environment
you'd actually want to be playing in.
The level design still has some choice in it,
and occasionally the kinds of freedom
you'd really want like the police station,
which is great and offers a fantastic range of choices
for how to deal with it,
but a majority of the game
is strangely compartmentalized, constrained,
a thin tube funneling you
to the next important cut scene.
I know I'm venting a lot about those cut scenes,
but this gives me an excellent opportunity
to segue into this game's problem with vents.
Okay, in this sequence I've shown you a few times before,
there's four guys making patrols around this area,
more guys off in the side halls,
and a doorway leading ahead to the next part of the level,
but this area that's harder to get to unseen
is the room the hostages are in.
Once you get inside, you're locked in by a trap
and have to frantically disarm the bomb
by hacking it or learning the password
or just smashing the tubes,
which is a hilarious thing to discover you can do.
This is a great sequence.
Getting into this room and saving the hostages
is the first level's optional challenging
secondary objective,
and the people who designed the stealth system
and guard patrols act like it.
It's much harder to stealth your way in here
than the critical path.
I mean, if you shoot all the guys,
it's easy and bullshit,
but you can see how the stealth
was designed to be fun,
so you can do all of that,
all that fun learning the patrols
and carefully navigating,
or you can go in the vent next to the entrance to the room,
which leads directly into the room with the hostages.
Now, this first one kind of works.
It's a reward for exploration.
You have to find the vent hidden behind a box,
so if you're doing this,
it means you chose to look around a little more
and get a sense of your surroundings.
I'm not a big fan of how the vent
is a definitive solution to the problem, though.
In Deus Ex, vents were like vents.
You could use them to your advantage,
but they never took you directly
from the start of the room
to the place you needed to go to win.
In the subway, for example,
to free the hostages using stealth,
you had to find a vent
and then meticulously crawl through
an entire ventilation system
and come out of the right one
so you wouldn't get seen instantly.
The vents were part of the challenge,
not the solution.
In this game, more often than not,
vents take you directly past the problem.
You could deal with the guys in the next area
using stealth or combat,
or you can go in the vent next to where you came in
that takes you past them.
You could.
Oh, fucking hell, guys.
You see the vent here
before you even see the thing
the vent takes you past.
You could deal with this turret
and landmine on the wall
and camera which will set off the alarms
or go over here and hack the camera.
You know, the intended challenge of the room.
The point of this room is to show you
the value of hacking.
Or you could get in the vent
that leads directly behind all of it
and just walk past.
If being able to kill everyone
easily hurt the game's design,
being able to just get in a vent
and go past all of it
fucking executes it behind the woodshed.
Look, maybe I'm smarter than the average gang
of anti-augmentation terrorists,
but whoever set this shit up
must have seen the vent, right?
Wait a second.
Why didn't the hostages just go in the vent?
Just leave through the vent.
What the fuck are you doing?
This is how,
and I'm going to make a conservative estimate,
85,000% of the game's levels work.
There's this one level in Hengsha
where the bad guys have locked down
an apartment complex
and you have to get inside
to get to the hacker's computer
I mentioned before.
Now, the front entrance is blocked off,
so you either have to get into a big fight right away
or maybe you can go all the way around the sides
and up a ladder
and then you can sneakily take out a few guys
and use stealth from there.
Wow, multiple paths.
This level's pretty good.
The developers are trying to reward you
for thinking logically about the 3D space
or there's a vent right here.
This vent takes you inside the complex
and into a well-guarded area
with some interesting points of cover.
This area could be a really cool stealth experience.
Oh, my God, I can't believe you found another vent.
You're such a good boy.
This vent takes you to the upper ground level
you could have had a fun time sneaking to
where you can easily just walk to the elevator
to the top floor without being seen.
On the top floor, you...
Holy shit!
I haven't even left the elevator!
Fucking come on, guys!
This vent takes you past all the guards
to directly next to the computer you need to access.
This is the absolute bottom of the downward spiral
that starts when you try to make a game
like Deus Ex simpler.
You make this how exploration works
and if you go in the other side,
the alternative way in I mentioned,
you know where it leads?
To a vent.
The vent takes you up the same elevator shaft
to a vent that comes out next to the other vent.
This is anti-level design.
You're literally skipping most of the levels
that were designed.
I've basically just ruined the game for you.
Once you realize that's how they're using vents,
you can't stop seeing it.
If you fail the dialogue challenge
to get an audience with Tong,
you have to come back and try again
to find out what he knows,
but don't worry, pal, because,
and I bet this'll be a surprise to you,
there's a vent next to his office
and it triggers a cutscene
where you learn the same information anyway.
This is the quest design equivalent
of putting a rocket launcher next to all the hard enemies.
You could talk Taggart into telling you
where Sanderval is or you'll never guess.
You'll never fucking guess.
You'll never fucking guess!
The vent drops you directly into his office
next to the computer with the information on it.
No thinking required.
The main challenge in this level is staying awake.
About time. What happened?
You get stuck in an air duct on the way over?
Ha ha, yeah, good one. Fuck off, Pritchard.
If you think this is a good example
of Deus Ex level design,
you need to stop settling for less in life
before it's too late.
You matter and you deserve better than this.
Every vent in Human Revolution,
including ones in maximum security buildings
that lead right to their important shit,
is yours to open for free
because locks don't exist anymore
and locking a vent using a keypad
would look really silly.
Some of the level designers even realized
they'd made the vents too easy a solution
and started trying to hide them,
which doesn't work because, you know, they glow,
so they started trying to block them
using heavy objects so you at least need
an augmentation to get to them.
Look how hard they had to work to get around the fact
they couldn't just lock the vents.
Why was the game built like this?
I don't know.
Maybe the designers had fond memories
of solving problems using vents
in other immersive sims and concluded
that vents equal good game design,
but the point was to make a world feel interconnected
like a real place would be
and make players who took the time to look around
feel rewarded for their ingenuity
or attention to detail.
Vents weren't the only kind of secret in Deus Ex.
There were secrets hidden all over the place,
buttons hidden behind innocuous objects
that unlock treasure troves of stuff,
or maybe the pinball machine
you've seen over half a dozen of already
activates a secret door if you play with this one.
These two are both in the same level even.
After this happens,
you'll be checking every pinball machine
in the rest of the world just in case.
There is nothing remotely like this in Human Revolution
except for one specific thing.
This stuffed animal activates the secret door
into the hacker's man cave,
but it's not used to discover a secret.
The cave is already visible
because the bad guys blew a wall down.
This makes for some really cool
environmental storytelling though.
The Mercs couldn't find the way
of opening the secret entrance,
so they had to redecorate.
It's funny, but serious question.
Why aren't there any actual secrets like this in the game?
There isn't anything even remotely as cool
as the pinball machine.
Instead, potential explorers get to say,
I wonder what's in this room.
Oh, it's a vent every few minutes.
This is the vent room.
Everyone has one of these in the future.
It's horribly inefficient,
but the powerful vent lobby won't let us change the laws.
The hacker's apartment is really good
at demonstrating the blandness
of the new simpler level design
because it's another accidental knockoff
of a level from Deus Ex I,
this time Maggie Chow's apartment in Hong Kong.
As soon as you look at it, the difference is clear.
You're not forced to hack a computer for one,
but you also have more choices
for how to deal with the situation.
Taking the elevator or sneaking into the shaft
aren't the only entrances.
You can get in from the roof entrance
or, you know, blow open the skylight
and get in that way.
You can also get in by platforming
from neighboring buildings that are easier to get into
and aren't guarded by mechs,
and once you're done, you can leave
by literally jumping off the roof
or out the window and using your cyber legs
to land without dying.
This feels like an apartment
in a real skyline full of other buildings.
This feels like a corridor with a nice background
outside some unbreakable windows,
but hey, lookie here.
There's a balcony out there.
Oh, and what's this?
A skylight just like Maggie Chow's apartment,
but you can't do anything with them.
This level has none of what made the original level
truly open-ended and free.
The skylight and balcony are just for show.
You come in and out of this whole area
through one of two entryways
which are next to each other.
Sophie's choice, a vent or an elevator.
No, wait, there's actually a super secret way in.
If you stack boxes and have the high jump power,
you can get into this higher level of the shaft
above the vent.
It leads to another vent.
It comes out right next to the other vents
and the elevator.
♪ ♪
Level design!
The design is so ridiculously oversimplified
that it actually messes with the story and quests
the game is trying to use the levels for.
In the Hengsha level, for example,
to progress to the next mission,
you have to get into the employee entrance
of Taiyong Medical,
but the entrance is, guess what,
the only building in the universe
that isn't locked using the same fucking keypad
so you can't hack it.
The developers realized players could just leave the hub
and go to the next level if they knew where to go
so they had to reinvent the concept of the key.
Once the player learns that's where they have to go,
they're sent on a quest to find a Taiyong Medical key card
to get in here.
However, because the world map is so empty
and there aren't that many places to explore,
most players found it already by accident
several hours ago.
Well, what do you know, windmill?
I've already got an employee card.
You begin the Hengsha level right outside this hotel,
and since most players explore the thing
put right in front of them, they go inside.
When inside, you find one of the game's four side quests,
so it's good they made it easy to find.
The key card it'll turn out you need in a few hours
is just sitting on a table nearby.
Less than a minute's walk from the start of the level,
you have already accidentally skipped part of it.
There's even a special dialogue between Jensen and Malek
for picking it up before you know you'll need it
for anything.
Tell me something, Malek.
You think a smart card with a Taiyong Medical logo on it
will come in handy in this town?
Maybe. Why are you asking?
No reason. Just thinking ahead.
Hey, looks like I've accidentally beaten
a later quest by walking into the building
next to where you dropped me off, Malek.
Whoops.
Who takes their company key card out of their wallet
and puts it on the fucking coffee table like that?
What the fuck is this?
Now, I love the idea of being sent on a quest
to find a key card,
which you could have found way earlier.
That's great, but levels this simplistic
mean you aren't actually finding it early
if you're big on exploring.
You're finding it immediately within minutes of starting
if you take a passing interest in your surroundings.
Now, let's add one extra layer of silliness to this
because before you find out you need that key card,
your mission requires you to get to Tong in the Hive.
To get into the Hive, you need to talk your way in
or bribe the guy at the door
or somehow gain access to someone's membership card.
The membership card is one floor down
in the same building with the other key card.
Why are you asking?
No reason.
Just thinking ahead.
A shockingly huge amount of players
are going to find these items long before
they even know what they do.
That's not clever sequence breaking.
That's a very poorly designed sequence.
Oh, but if you don't find the membership card
and don't have the money to get in, no problem.
There's a fucking vent around the back
leading right inside.
The more enclosed levels mean a lot of the game's
augmentations and abilities aren't as fun
as they easily could have been.
In Deus Ex, having the ability to fall a large distance
without dying changed the shape of the world for you.
Rooftops were now exits that prevented having to deal
with enemies you'd have run into taking the normal way down.
Human Revolution's slow fall power would work the same way
except for the fact the levels aren't designed
as interesting 3D spaces,
so only a select few places offer this type of situation.
So instead, to make the augmentation more useful
than the design can properly accommodate,
long falls are added specifically for players
to have something to do with that power,
like this elevator shaft in Detroit.
The game is going, look, one specific place
for you to use your powers.
You're so creative!
Instead of making a world where creative players
naturally benefited from having this ability.
There is an example of the kind of free-form use
of a building's height as an entrance in the game, though.
Unfortunately, it's in a cut scene.
Bell Tower break into the Alice Garden pods
through the ceiling once you bring the key card
to the hacker.
NPCs get to have more fun with your powers than you do.
You can only enter and leave this entire pod hotel
through the front door.
There is no alternative way in.
This is because they want you to be unable to leave
when these guys drop in and block off the exit,
forcing you to leave through, you guessed it,
a series of linear corridors with vents
skipping any of the difficult parts,
leading to a new back exit which only now opened up.
The experience you do have is pretty fun
for what it is, sure,
but this simply isn't how Deus Ex levels should work.
Oh!
Oh!
Oh!
Oh!
Oh!
Oh!
Oh!
Oh!
Oh!
Oh!
Oh!
Oh!
My problem with this design is it doesn't let players
be clever by themselves.
It's contingent on a game designer giving you
something clever to do with it.
If they forget to come up with some,
which they often do, you're shit out of luck, Buddy Boy.
Without tall buildings with rooftop entrances and exits,
apart from literally one in the warehouses
I didn't forget, don't be a pedant,
the Icarus landing system is reduced
from a fantastic addition to the player's arsenal
to a slightly faster alternative
to taking the ladder down certain drops
and only slightly faster because the falling animation
is slow and annoying.
The other big augmentation that gets wasted here
is the ability to punch through certain walls.
This powers a really interesting idea,
opening up new paths by cutting through
destructible parts of the level,
and it only gets to be fun in practice
if the developers come up with interesting ways of using it.
It feels like they made a lot of the levels
and then went, oh, shit,
and tried to add a bunch of punchable walls
at the last second so players who got it
feel like they can do something with it.
Wait, what's this window showing if the room is that small?
What is going on here?
I could be wrong, but I have a sneaking suspicion
this wall was added a bit late.
You want to know a cool thing about doors in Deus Ex?
Wow, Deus Ex is such a cool game
that I'm about to enjoy telling you how doors work.
Doors weren't just a thing you could access
by finding keys or learning the code to a keypad
or by hacking the computer it was hooked up to
or by learning the password some other way
or by picking them.
They were also physical, actual doors,
which means you could just destroy them.
The rocket launcher is nature's lockpick.
That's so many options,
and being able to just break the door
is believable and adds to the feeling
You can destroy doors in Human Revolution
if you have a grenade or a lot of bullets,
though the scarcity of resources makes this a bit of a waste.
The mechanic is implemented horribly.
Locked doors don't show you how much health they have
or even indicate they can be damaged
until they suddenly shatter into dust.
♪ ♪
You can see a door's health once it's unlocked,
as in once you can just open it
and its health is totally irrelevant.
You can also break open vents,
which, let me remind you, are literally never locked,
making it pointless to ever do so.
I bet most people didn't even notice
you could do this because who cares?
It never serves any purpose.
Something I thought was really funny was apartments
in China have these sliding doors,
and you can break them open easily.
They're flimsy, you know,
but when they're open, they become invincible.
This doesn't massively affect the gameplay,
but it goes a long way in showing how little thought
went into what used to be a really good mechanic.
Tons of things which were breakable in the original
can't be now.
Safes are indestructible,
so you have to know the code or hack,
and the many storage units in the game
are immune to damage as well.
This reduces the player's available options
in addition to making it impossible
to even know if anything is destructible
because most of the time it isn't.
The first time I tried to blow down a locked door,
the grenade straight up didn't work for some reason,
and since I had no way of knowing
I assumed locked doors couldn't be destroyed for ages
until I tried again just to double check
while I was writing the script for this video.
You know what would have been useful?
Showing the player the health of locked objects
or even saying when something's indestructible.
There's a little game you could have taken inspiration from
that did this.
It's called Deus Ex.
They just forgot to make half the stuff in the game
respond to damage.
Lockers, something players might want
to be able to open a bunch of all at once
by throwing a grenade into a room
and peeking around the horrible door
of every single one are also indestructible.
One of the most fun things in Deus Ex
was running low on picks and seeing how many lockers
you could open with your spare GEP rockets
in Vandenberg without evaporating the office cat.
There's something immensely funny and satisfying
about tossing a grenade into a room
and turning it into a festival of loot.
This isn't a nitpick.
This is a fundamental component
of Deus Ex's player freedom and immersion
that just doesn't work.
You know, even when Invisible War
was being Invisible War,
you could still reliably blow things open
with explosives.
It wasn't a crapshoot whether the developers
had bothered to make something break open
like it should.
Deus Ex's worst moments were when you had
no clever alternatives to the more obvious choices,
like when a grate you could pick
couldn't be destroyed by other means,
but this is just how human revolution works.
You need the lift-heavy object's ability
to move the vending machine to get into this vent.
You could say it's a venting machine,
but hey, maybe you can use some creativity
and destroy the machine with a grenade.
Vending machines are literally indestructible.
Didn't you know?
The best you can hope for is the physics
blowing it clear of the vent,
but for that to happen,
the physics would have to work.
Goodbye.
Meanwhile...
♪ ♪
Deus Ex made almost everything breakable.
Plants, boxes, bodies.
All right, I killed your boss.
Well, okay.
Trash sometimes spawns rats in it
when you destroy it because it's New York City, baby.
Smash all the vases and beakers on the floor you want.
Take this, globalists.
The game certainly is much nicer looking
than the earlier games.
Humans don't look like
Age of Mythology Prometheans
with faces painted on them for one,
but just generally,
everything is so much more beautiful.
I mean, look at these ceilings.
At least a year of the game's development
probably went into these.
Holy cow, bro. I love this.
Top ten ceilings in history
right behind the Sistine Chapel
and another clever-sounding thing,
but when it comes to interaction,
you know, the game part of this game,
almost every prop or object
is invincible set dressing.
These beakers? Bulletproof.
This Chinese food? Immortal.
This glass table?
Absorbing nearby humans to gain their power.
The world feels so static,
and it makes you feel even less
like you're really interacting with it.
Lapicus claims this is a selling point too.
Look at this. What?
Quit screwing around.
Are you telling me your game is better
because you can't throw plants at people?
This is cyberbullying.
I've seen people say this game
has amazing emergent gameplay,
like, oh, wow,
you can break open destructible walls
if you don't have the wall-punching ability.
Yeah, that's nice,
although if you don't have that ability,
destructible walls don't noticeably glow,
so it's hard to find many of them
without already having the ability,
at which point you're not going to waste grenades
or ammunition on a wall you can just punch down.
Actually, the punchable wall augmentation
opens up a bunch of extra questions.
You can smash down concrete walls
if they're slightly cracked,
but you can't use this ability
to punch open locked doors?
You can't just break whatever locking mechanism
is keeping this flimsy door shut
with your mega fists?
Chaos Theory had a lock-picking minigame
that got a bit dull the way hacking minigames did here,
and that was on top of the hacking minigame
they also had,
but the designers also gave you the ability
to loudly break the lock and open it instantly.
People who heard the noise or saw the broken lock
would know someone was here,
but if you don't want to pick that lock,
you don't have to.
Picking it became a choice,
one which felt more professional and stealthy.
Wouldn't it be cool if that augmentation
also let you smash the locks off doors
and make a ton of noise
or risk setting off a security system or something?
It would be really cool to have an ability
like that at your disposal,
and I'm shocked the people who made a game
that literally did this didn't think of it.
It would automatically give you a lot more
to do with this power
and save on having to think of more places
to put punchable walls,
which they were really running low on towards the end.
Something else really bugs me about these levels.
I spent a long time trying to put my finger on it,
but it turns out the answer was floating right in front
of my face the entire time,
so I'm not sure how I missed it.
Oh, did you think I forgot about the quest markers?
How could I?
How could anyone?
Quest markers are annoying
when they're off in the corner,
but it turns out it could have been worse.
They could have been unconstrained.
They could have just, no, no, leave me alone.
They didn't seem to consider how it would look
if you had multiple side quests happening at once
or if you were at a stage in a side quest
with multiple objectives because who, boy,
does that door need me to know?
Every side quest and individual component
each side quest has is outside it.
There's one side quest where you have to neutralize
an entire apartment full of gangsters.
Now, they're localized to a single small apartment,
so you only need one quest marker for that, right?
["Live and Let Live"]
I have genuinely died in this game
because I couldn't see a guy behind a pile
of his buddy's quest markers.
Yeah, so the game is a little desperate
to make sure players don't miss
what they're supposed to be doing
to the point that it's pretty distracting, ironically.
They expect you to toggle off the markers
for quests you aren't doing at the exact moment,
and yeah, sure, this helps for that
if you don't mind doing one thing at a time,
but the real issue is making a game
which has a method of pointing the player
directly towards their required destination
inspires really lazy design
because now the levels don't have to make sense
to players as they navigate
because they've got a thing telling them where to go.
If you've played the game, you'll know that even though
the markers are really distracting,
you have to leave them on
because there's no other way of finding these quests.
Detroit is an unintuitive area to explore.
It's a ton of very similar streets
connecting to other very similar streets,
and when it's not those streets,
it's identical apartment buildings,
which granted is realistic to most urban cities,
but that's not how games ought to work.
New York in Deus Ex had character and presence.
It was designed to be experienced
by a player who didn't have it memorized
or know exactly where to go.
You enter and you're like, where am I?
And you look around and you know where you are
because every part of the level looks different
and things are really well signposted,
literally in some cases.
I love the place everyone calls the Taun Hotel
is really the Hilton Hotel but the sign's broken.
It's memorable and makes the hotel
into an obvious landmark you can use to navigate.
If you have to find Adam Jensen's apartment
off in the corner of the map
without quest markers telling you exactly where it is,
you're screwed.
If you try to stop and get your bearings by looking around,
you'll never get anywhere.
Detroit is a maze you need a GPS to traverse.
Quests are not designed to be doable
with the markers turned off.
You'd have to manually check every single back alley
to find the specific one with the guy
you need to talk to for the current quest,
especially when the guy has moved
since the last time you talked to him for no reason.
Conversely, I was feeling clever
when I wrote this sentence, this also means
the player is never expected or challenged
to pay attention.
Deus Ex has an optional secret base in the sewers
the first time you get to New York
that's a clever setup for some of the future plot.
Finding it requires looking around yourself
or talking to a character you meet
in another optional area and hearing him mention
the base in the sewers and choosing to check it out.
Nothing gets plopped on your screen,
no arrow on your mini-map,
just good old-fashioned detective work.
You feel like a spy on the trail
of a conspiracy and on a deeper level,
your objective is to find a generator
the terrorists have hidden. Finding it is the point.
Asking around, exploring,
bothering to check out side content and meet
other characters who might come in handy later.
You can get on the rooftops of buildings
and physically see the building the NSF
are clearly trying to defend. This is the point
of this section. It's why the game
feels so free and personal despite
being, at its heart, pretty linear.
DXHR feels exactly
as linear as it is. In every
single moment, it is telling you exactly
where you're going next and
you're following it. When you have to do the
equivalent quest, shutting down a signal the
bad guys are generating, you know precisely
where it is at all times. There is
no mystery, no search. Pritchard
gives you a quest marker and you walk
to it. Hell, you could have just got your pilot
to drop you off right there and save you the trouble
and when you do turn it off, she actually does turn up
to take you to the next area, which is a little
insulting. I'm sure there's a plot contrivance
but in the original game, the point was that
you didn't know exactly where it was
so you didn't feel like you had your time wasted
when an aircraft came to pick you up after you
found it. Quest markers are not
an alternative to level design. There
are a few brief sections in the game
where they're switched off so the game has
to be designed to make the player do their own
thinking and exploring and the game's fun
factor instantly skyrockets.
There's a base where your signal is jammed
or whatever so you have to manually find
the scientist you're looking for and it's
easily the best level in the game to
navigate. Each of the buildings has a
completely different shape and feel,
unique designs and visual cues,
the outside area is built so it's easy to know
where you are relative to everything. It's really
cool. Five minutes in, you find the signal
jammer and turn it off and the game is bullshit
again. Now you know exactly where to go
and suddenly you're not really exploring anymore.
This is the one section in the game
where turning off the quest markers actually works
really well so at least it's a good
time if you keep the markers turned off.
It kind of sucks that almost every game
that heavily relies on these markers inevitably
has a tiny, really cool segment
that turns them off where the level design has to
account for them being turned off and everything
gets so much better. Instead of being
an interesting take on the central mechanics,
it ends up being a brief foray into
better mechanics you don't get anywhere else
and now the player knows exactly
what they're missing the rest of the time.
There's an oversight in the PC version
that's kind of funny but also prevents
the markers from at least getting better
with age. The game was designed to look
good at 720p on the PlayStation 3
and Xbox 360. When nixes
were creating the PC port, and god bless
them, otherwise they did a fantastic job,
someone made the UI not scale
with resolution. This means at higher resolutions
like 1080p, 1440p,
and 4K if you're an idiot who owns
a 4K screen, the UI gets
increasingly harder to see and read
but for some godforsaken reason,
the objective markers and only
the objective markers do scale
so even though everything else is so small,
people watching this video on their phone
won't be able to read the in-game subtitles.
Don't blame me. That's just how the game looks
at 1440p. The quest markers are
still blasting your head off and
messing with the visuals of an otherwise
still beautiful game.
Incidentally, if you get the chip replacement,
the glitchy health bar and ammo
counter you get during the boss battle are
scaled so you can briefly see just
how readable the game could have been.
You know how older video game cities
were always a lot smaller than a real city
would be because of hardware limitations or what have you?
It turns out that was a blessing in
disguise. New York, Hong Kong,
and Paris felt big but not so big
that getting around was annoying because you know
what's not that fun? Trying to get around
a big city on foot.
["Hey."
["Hey."
["Hey."
["Hey."
["Hey."
["Hey."
["Hey." You laughed or something?"
The new, realistically big Detroit
and Hengsha levels have tons of places
that serve no actual gameplay purpose whatsoever,
but the level has to be big
because cities are big. The game does
create a very nice sense of mood with this though.
The designers came up with hundreds of brands
and logos to populate their future with.
There's some genuine creativity on display
here, but these levels aren't used
in ways that benefit from this. You aren't
milling around the cool environment,
making small talk with locals, having unique
encounters as you traverse the hustle and bustle
of the city. It's window dressing
as you follow a quest marker to the places
the gameplay happens. J.C. Denton's
walk speed wasn't super fast by the first person
shooter standards of the time, but the small
and dense levels packed with stuff to do
and secrets to find made the pace
feel brisk. Adam feels
significantly slower than J.C.,
especially in the much larger cities.
You can sprint for two seconds.
That's not a joke. Two seconds, and then
it has to recharge.
Ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah.
Oh. Oh.
Oh.
Ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah.
They made running shit on purpose
so you had more stuff to put praxis points
into. I mean, it's not a surprise he's going
so slow if he's carrying so much stuff
everywhere in his arms. Pathologic made
you walk for hours deliberately as
a form of punishment for the player.
The game was trying to hurt you and make you
question what you were doing with your time.
Human Revolution is trying to be a fun
cyberpunk action RPG, so I
don't think they should be aiming for the same effect.
The atmosphere and art design deserve
some credit here, though. This is some of the
most impressive really boring
walking back and forth between objectives
I've done in my life, and I'm an expert
on those. This is one of the
best realized worlds in the history
of video games. A decade later,
the graphics hold up incredibly well
because good visual design just
doesn't age, but you're traversing
it to do the same hacking minigame
every five feet to unlock safes
with a negligible amount of money in them
which you can't even spend because the store
only had ten of the bullets you want.
This is why this game is so difficult
to analyze without going way overboard
and making an unwatchably long video.
All the pieces of an excellent game
are right here. They even made the
skylight you could have got in through in a better
version of the game, but they don't
stick the landing. Instead, the game is
merely fine. The stealth is fun,
the combat is good, and the levels are okay
but don't encourage creativity,
and it's easy to get bored because the game
never asks that much of you.
I joked before about people quitting because of the
hacking minigame, but more seriously,
it's probably because halfway through,
there aren't even many new levels to keep
things fresh. You instead go to Detroit
and Hengsha all over again with
even less to see this time. The first
visits to these locations have an okay amount
of side quests, about as many as the
original did for its city-type locations.
The second visit to Detroit has
a side quest with a second one if
you completed another side quest during the
first visit, and I mean fully completed.
If you forgot to read the three emails
you got sent at the end of the first half of
the quest before you left for China hours ago,
you can never start the second half
once you get back. The second visit to
China is so devoid of new material
the game lies and says there are more
side missions than there actually are.
There's two, one from this guy and one from
this lady, but the game pretends
there's a third quest. The other
quest, a matter of discretion,
is given to you by another character.
It's to talk to this lady who then
gives you the second quest.
Are you the man Mr. Darrow sent?
A guy calls you on the telephone and
gives you the quest to get the other quest
so it feels like you're doing more quests.
There are some really ambitious ideas for a cyberpunk
world in here saddled with an engine
and hardware generation that didn't match
that ambition. The simplified levels
remind me a lot of the PS2 version
of the original game, which was good
but a bit more stripped down and missing
the expansiveness and complexity that made
the PC version quite so special.
I'd compare the level design to Invisible Wars,
but even I'm not that mean.
Actually, no. Invisible War put enemies
in the vents to punish you for thinking they were
an easy solution, so its level design
is objectively better. Next chapter.
Goodbye.
Ugh!
I talked to the chairman.
We discussed regime change for New Cairo.
♪
The story of the original Deus Ex
was a complete mess.
In a good way, though. It's part of what makes it
amazing, but it's also why making another
one is like trying to solve the trolley problem
while trapped inside the trolley.
It was set in 2052 in a world
that's very different from ours, or was
different in the year 2000. Many of the game's
scariest predictions turned out to be true.
My favorite games keep doing that.
Let it spill over to the schools
and churches. Let the bodies pile up
in the streets. There's a dozen
factions with their own agendas all fighting
for supremacy, uneasy alliances,
ancient organizations, revolutionary
groups, secret bases underneath
other secret bases, corporate conspiracies,
and even greasels!
Oh, God!
Oh, God!
Despite discussing important
ideas like the value of democracy
and the human need to feel witnessed by a god
and how the rich have manipulated
the system so workers pay more in taxes
than their boss, the writing still manages
to be fun.
A bomb's a bad choice
for close-range combat.
Deus Ex knows that a world where every conspiracy
turned out to be true would be a little bit
silly.
No, I wanted orange.
It gave me lemon lime. It's the maintenance man.
He knows I like orange.
So you think the staff has some kind of plot?
Yes, they do that on purpose.
So instead of pretending to be the darkest
and most serious-est story ever,
it's more like an X-Files box set
raising some important ideas
and themes but with a sense of humor about it.
You take another step forward and here
I am again, like your own
reflection repeated in a hall of mirrors.
That makes me one ugly son of a bitch.
The game has multiple endings,
all three of which have different implications
for the future of the world.
You can let things continue as normal but with a slightly
more benevolent dictatorship in place run by you
and that guy who loves betraying people.
But I'm sure it'll all work out fine.
Wait, that's not a good-sounding Paradise Lost quote.
Oh, shit. Are we the baddies?
Or you can shut off all advanced
information technology and plunge the world
into a new dark age where YouTubers
have to provide something of value to society
or you can fuse with an advanced AI
and become a kind of all-knowing god
from the machine. Hey, look, it's the title.
But now the question is, how the hell
do you make another one of these?
Do you decide on one ending being canon
and hope for the best? Do you ask for a player's
save file and try to react to their choices
and retcon all the big ones
because you can't be bothered? Or do you embody
the spirit of Deus Ex's madness
and push it even further
and put jet boosters on the trolley?
Ah! No!
Enter Deus Ex Invisible War,
the game equivalent of trying to replace sleep
with your ADHD medication.
Which ending is canon? All of them.
At once! J.C. Denton
fused with an advanced AI and became
a godlike, hyper-intelligent super being
but also all the technology
in the world shut off, which kind of messed
with his plans, but also the fucking
Illuminati are still running around,
but also there's even more Greasels now!
Ah! Set 20 years
after the most confusing day in the world,
Invisible War tries to follow up
on the original with intriguing new perspectives
and ironic twists and
tries to tell a new story of its own
with new characters while it's at it.
Then those two things smash into each other
and create the most fascinating mess
of a story ever conceived.
It's less X-Files boxed set and more
trying to figure out the plot of X-Files
from Fox Mulder best moments compilation
number 11.
Woo! How is this in part 11?
This is at least a number four. I love this game.
Is it good? I don't know, but it's
definitely the most. This game has
four radically different endings
that each permanently alter the world
even more than the originals did,
ranging from wiping out almost all life
to uniting human consciousness
in a new way of being.
So one question, how do you make a sequel
to this? If someone asks you
to make Deus Ex 3,
as it was tentatively titled in its early teasers,
they're trying to trick you into
destroying your career. So
what do you do? You make a prequel.
Oh, no!
Prequels can be great, but they often
have to carry a lot of excess baggage.
This is all the stuff we didn't need
to see to enjoy the original, so
seeing it is by definition kind of
unnecessary. You know his name.
You know his methods.
And this February, you learn
that at some point he started
doing those things.
Holy shit, this movie's fucking
terrible, and in interactive media
this can be even worse because now
your interaction is being limited
by what's supposed to happen next.
You killed the future.
You created a time paradox.
Okay, in context, that's kind of
meant as a joke. Uh, let's do a real
example. Stalker, Shadow of Chernobyl,
began with the marked one on the battle bus with
the quest to down Strelok at the Tilted Towers.
Whether he succeeded in his quest or
if he merely got showered with money to
death was based on your actions.
Then Stalker got a prequel.
Clear Sky has many problems, one of them
being it's the successor to a game with a lot
of endings and some big twists which
itself has no real twists and can
only end one way, and then Shadow
of Chernobyl happens.
You spend 10 to 30 hours helping
the marked one catch his bus.
People who play didn't know what I'm talking about.
Honestly, I could talk for hours about how you...
No, Rachel, I won't let you stop me this time.
The people need to know. Is that a taser?
♪♪
So yeah, prequels are something you generally
want to avoid unless you've got a really
good idea for it.
But as we've established,
Eidos Montreal didn't really have much
of a choice. They're kind of between a rock
and a hard place here. I mean, I guess they could
do a reboot, but rebooting the franchise
kind of isn't ideal either. You really
should never do one of those, Eidos Montreal.
Oh, no! Given that all of the options
were kind of bad, it does beg the question
why make a Deus Ex game at all
apart from brand recognition?
Well, it might shock you, but the answer is
brand recognition. Did you ever wonder why
the next Prey was called Prey
and not, I don't know, New Space Game
even though it's nothing like Prey?
God, these names are confusing.
It's because the money men at Bethesda
or Eidos Square Enix aren't going to spend
millions of dollars and years of dev time
on an ambitious risk-taking original
idea unless it's got a vaguely
bankable name. We already had in mind
the kind of game we were making, and then
Bethesda said, hey, what about using this name?
Hey! Why don't you call it Prey, guys?
We killed the company that was making
the original Prey 2 even though
it was basically finished because they wouldn't
let us buy them. That's a true story.
Look it up.
So now we have this name lying around.
Prey 2017's great, don't get me wrong,
and the devs had a lot of creative
freedom with it except for the name.
That game had to be Prey somehow.
This is why, at least in the AAA
gaming space, original big-budget
games are surprisingly rare, but you can
expect endless sequels, prequels,
reboots, and
remasters of popular existing
properties until you're cold in your grave.
What have you done?
Why does he look? Because when you're talking
years of work and tens of millions
of state-subsidized Canadian fun bucks,
you need to provide at least some proof
of a return on investment, and the
best way to do that is to be called
famous thing colon more shit.
Maybe none of this is true and the
creators really wanted to specifically
make the next Deus Ex game, but if that's
the case, I think it was a poor choice.
You see, now you have to design your game around
dodging the complaints of losers who care
about the Deus Ex timeline. Losers like
me prepare to be destroyed.
What I'm getting at is the story is trying
to be unique and original, but also
very self-conscious about looking like
it definitely will lead into Deus Ex
maybe someday.
This approach damages both the game's
ability to relate to the other games and
its ability to tell the original story
it clearly desperately wants to.
Before you can even explore the story
that is here, you have to excavate it from
under a pile of distracting references
to the original. For example,
J.C. Denton's boss, Joseph Manderly,
is referenced like a dozen times throughout
the plot like he's a major player
directly involved with the important stuff
you're dealing with.
We've been compromised.
Manderly was supposed to have that morgue locked down,
but somebody got to the corpse before we did.
Like, this guy's so important,
he's getting name-dropped in the pre-rendered
cutscenes by bosses. What would
an ordinary player think this is setting up?
You the home sec guy I was ordered to wait for?
Tell Manderly I didn't get the memo
until I was halfway through the autopsy.
Maybe the story that you're playing?
Right?
Someone in the government,
a man named Manderly,
ordered that a specially appointed
medical examiner perform the autopsy.
So you think, I get it. This guy's a big deal.
Maybe we meet or even fight him later?
No. They eventually just stop mentioning him.
If you were trying to figure out what was up
with Manderly or find him,
you were wasting your time.
This isn't part of the story.
This was the game's attempt to tie itself
into the series more,
but they've gone about it in a way
that makes the actual story you're trying to follow
really annoying because it's full of stuff
you think you're supposed to pay attention to
that turns out to be fan service
and doesn't go anywhere.
I'm sure they were trying to be subtle about it
so their own story had room to breathe.
In fact, here's Mary DeMalle saying that.
Well, the good thing about doing the prequel
is that if you haven't played the game before,
you don't have to worry about it.
You don't have to suddenly become,
like, oh, what's going on?
I think she had the right idea here.
This was a story that first and foremost
needed to work on its own merits,
but there is frankly too much
Deus Ex One stuff in here for that to happen.
The first thing you see in the game
in the opening is this guy, Bob Page,
the antagonist of Deus Ex One
and also the first guy you see
in the opening of that game too.
You need to know Bob Page is behind this
for some reason even though he never appears
in the actual game.
He turns up after the credits.
I'm looking forward to seeing the hybrid project
up close, Mr. Page.
But please...
call me Bob.
This shot in the post-credits scene
is reused from the opening too.
I don't know whether to be annoyed how lazy this was
or glad they didn't waste too much effort
on something so unnecessary.
People who are playing this first,
and for a lot of people this was their introduction
to the series, will spend the entire game
wondering who the hell that guy the intro focused on was,
and they will never get an answer.
I love when my first experience of a series
is a bunch of shit I can't possibly understand.
There's a bit during the walk and talk
a few minutes later where a guy drops a reference
to Page Industries, and this one's kind of cute.
Players who knew what Page Industries was
would get it, and players who didn't
could write it off as world building and office banter.
This subtlety would have worked really well,
but you've already blown past subtle references
to Bob Page when you began the game
with a minute and a half intro starring Bob Page
even though he's not even in the game.
I'm a little paged out, buddy.
The opening, ending, and quite a lot in between
is an extended reminder of a different story
you could be playing instead.
People who know who Lucius De Beers is
aren't gonna clap their hands like a circus seal
when they see his name turn up, and people who don't
are gonna wonder why they keep reading emails
about people they don't know who don't turn up in the story.
All these problems come to a head in,
where else, the pre-order DLC.
If you got the explosive mission pack,
at one point you literally take a break
from the story you're playing
to help rescue a main character you've never met before
to help them get onto a boat
to the place they need to be 20 years later.
The most relevant interaction Adam Jensen has
with the plot of Deus Ex 1
is to help a guy catch his bus.
During the escape sequence with the bomb,
you see him get on his boat, the Tracer.
Wow, how long did that take you?
But rescuing Tong was pre-order content
a majority of players didn't get to do,
and since this cut scene is pre-rendered
and happens the same way no matter what,
there isn't an alternative version
for if you didn't get the rescue Tong mission.
So most players' experience of this element of the story
is some guy they've never seen before
turns up for five seconds, waves at Adam
like you're supposed to know who he is,
and people who haven't played the original
are left asking, wait, who are you?
Guess you should have pre-ordered from GameStop.
Ha ha ha ha ha ha!
I feel bad making this criticism because
for the reasons we've explored, it's not like they had
much of a choice in making their project
have to also work as a prequel,
and how they handled it is just kicking someone
while they're down, which in Quebec I think
they would call a, uh, folks pass,
but Deus Ex is one of the best stories
in the history of gaming, and Human Revolution
isn't doing its own story any favors
by reminding fans of the much better story
they actually liked.
So when the story isn't trying to shoehorn in
confusing and unnecessary references to the first game,
what is the story of this one actually about?
♪♪
Sorry, there's a typo there.
Now, since it's a video game,
we're grading on a really weirdly shaped curve here.
They won an award for the writing
at the Canadian Video Game Awards that year,
beating out other games like Assassin's Creed Revelations
and Warhammer 40,000 Space Marine.
Wow, what stiff competition.
This game's story is not great,
but also much, much better than most other video games
by such a wide margin it feels wrong
criticizing it too hard.
The performances are fantastic. Well, mostly.
Someone's not coming back for the sequel,
and there's some solid comedy in there too.
There's a fantastic part where you're supposed
to tell a code phrase to a guy,
and you can just get it wrong on purpose.
You don't even fail the mission for doing this.
It's just cool, and there's some neat setup
and payoff like, oh, see this guy showing his arm off
to the camera to make sure you see it?
That arm is gonna turn out to be important
three quarters of the game from now.
There's nothing wrong with the writing
in, say, the cut scenes,
even if they take away some player control.
The issue is that all of this writing
is happening around a badly written central plot.
Deus Ex Human Revolution is centrally
about the issue of augmentation
and whether it's good or not.
Deus Ex Human Revolution centers around
the use of mechanical augmentations
and how this technology has spread through the world
and how it is affecting the world.
It's not that the world is full of stuff,
but the main focus is augmentation.
It's that the world is full of people
discussing augmentation and nothing else
unless they're referencing Deus Ex 1.
Almost everyone in the universe of Human Revolution
has an opinion about whether having robot arms is good
or the death knell of the human soul.
What's all the fuss about this augmentation technology?
What are you looking at, pal?
Scanning me with those metal eyes of yours?
No offense, but, uh, if it were up to me,
this place would have a no-arg policy.
Hope you enjoy those fancy hands of yours
because in less than a year, they'll be worthless.
The rote mechanical insistence
on covering one and only one topic
makes the world strangely uncanny.
Have you seen the neural enhancements
they're coming up with these days?
How far are they gonna go?
In his apartment building,
Adam Jensen overhears a fight in another room.
A man has caught his wife cheating.
It's tense and upsetting, and for a brief moment,
it feels like you're in a world
with a bunch of different stories happening in it.
Then it turns out she cheated because they're both augmented.
I guess I wanted to be reminded of what it was like
to be with someone normal.
You were the one who wanted us to get enhanced.
Now you're saying we're not normal anymore.
Well, now try not to touch me too often
with my cold, dead, metal hand, okay?
I'm sad about my metal hand.
Ah! That's the story in a nutshell.
Granted, it's not quite as iconic
as I never asked for this.
Purity First's motivations are that they don't like
augmentations because they pollute the human body.
They hate them for this vague reason
so much they're willing to break into buildings,
take hostages, kill them with gas, and so on.
They dress evocative of Christian monks
with the prayer rope and everything
and wear a band over their arms with their group's logo on it.
Wow, I wonder what this is meant to remind people of.
Jesus Christ, you killed him, huh?
He asked for it.
Kept calling me a bigot.
He called me a bigot, so I murdered him.
You see, when you zoom in really closely
on one aspect of your setting,
you obscure the big picture in ways
that make it less interesting than if it was part of the whole.
Take Detroit, the city the American portions
of the game are set in.
Detroit, historically, is a city that was once prosperous,
then went through a major decline
as a result of the auto industry shipping
most of the work to places that didn't have strong unions
so they could pay them less.
People in poorer countries and eventually robots
in poorer countries make the cars
they used to make in Detroit.
There was also redlining, which effectively denied
Black Detroiters the opportunities afforded
by stable home ownership or being able
to open new businesses of their own,
which helped to ensure the economy had even less chance
of recovering, and the thing is,
the economic effects of historic racism
don't go away overnight.
When we invent cures for cancer or improved
human body parts that don't get sick
or let us run faster or jump higher
or think harder, people from economically
disadvantaged groups will have the least access.
The rich will be building themselves better,
and the poor will not.
Meanwhile, if augmentation becomes necessary
for certain jobs, like, say,
truck drivers can get their brains augmented
so they can drive all night without traditional
need for sleep, that might become
the expected norm for the job.
While people might only hire drivers who don't need
breaks to sleep, wage slavery would take on
even more physical connotations.
You could make a game about that idea,
and this stuff is discussed
at least briefly during the game.
Several homeless NPCs talk about how they lost
their jobs for refusing to be augmented,
and several other NPCs have serious job anxiety
or remark on how rich Adam must be
to be so augmented.
Listen, just because you have money
doesn't make you better than me.
The Hengsha level has a whole side quest
covering sex workers being forcibly augmented,
not just to serve clients,
but because it means they won't be able to quit
without losing access to the anti-rejection drugs
you have to take for life once you get an augmentation.
Human Revolution strays
dangerously close to making actual
real social commentary here.
In the last level, lots of the construction workers
have tools where their arms would be.
I'm gonna go ahead and call this body horror.
This is what the future might do
to working people, but did you see
how deep I had to dig to pull out that point just now?
This game is supposed to be about
human augmentation and its effect
on the world, but I had to talk about specific
random NPCs and the one
side quest that really went into it
and stare at random enemies in the last level
to find some kind of relevant observation.
If anything about this game's story
is lacking is how it's swimming in an ocean
of meaningful questions and points,
but the actual plot blows past it all
to be about terrorists who hate orgs
and org lovers and the bad men
who kidnapped your girlfriend.
Let's take another look at some of Purity First's
literature they leave strewn around the office
they broke into. This stuff about physical
limitations being human and not changing
the body is just bullshit.
These fuckers are against pacemakers.
They don't have a valuable point to make here,
and that's okay. Purity First are
deliberately written and presented in the game
as misguided radicals, which isn't
necessarily a bad choice, but it does mean
this group doesn't have anything interesting
to say. The NSF are a great
faction in the first game because their perspective
is genuinely interesting, at least partially
valid, and everything their leaders say
is just fucking true. There's a reason
every line this guy speaks is iconic.
You switch sides and work with
these guys partway through and it works
here because they were never presented as the
dumbest boys in the world, but yeah,
sure, hearing aids are immoral.
Nice one, buddy. Say hi to Ted
in prison for me, but here's the real shitter,
right? In between these two statements
is a really interesting one. This one
actually reaches for an important point.
It comes close to saying what a lot
of people say right now about modern technology
like electric cars or self-driving
cars or space rockets, namely
that even if they work, they're not the thing
humanity needs right now, and
wasting resources on them at a time like this
while so many real problems go unsolved
is a tragedy history won't look back
on kindly. If there even are any historians
left in 50 years, Purity
First could easily have been written as a
principled faction and represented a
tangible perspective, but instead
any of their justifiable motivations
are relegated to the back page of a
PDF and they're shooting people for calling
them racist. You could have, for example,
made them a group with a cohesive
ideology, like what if they were anti-augmentation
specifically because they saw
the impact it would have on working people
who couldn't afford them or who would be expected
to get them to keep their jobs?
What if they weren't even anti-augmentation
per se and this break-in was a cover
to steal for people who need access to
augmentations but can't afford them?
Alexander's is established as a veteran.
He belongs to a group that maybe could do with
access to replacement limbs. There were so
many compelling ways of writing this group
but instead they went with the Nazi
sash-wearing purity terrorist gang.
You think we're breaking the law.
Shut up!
All you body polluters break laws.
You're all the same. I don't like augmentations
because I'm the bad guy.
Ah! Even though there's plenty room to
discuss augmentation in a nuanced way,
it's instead often used as a stand-in
for other real-world issues.
There's newspaper articles about how an augmented
black woman has had to deal with bigotry,
not just for her race, but now also
for being augmented. First racism
and now robot arms.
People are coming up with special new slurs
for augmented people. Mechs, clanks,
cogs, chrome boy.
Chrome boy? Chrome boy.
Chrome boy. Hanses? They put more
creativity into clever new terms
for cyber racism than they did
into actually talking about the issues
that come into play if human augmentation
becomes available. It feels a bit like
they're adding augmentation on top of these
other things, like racism, abortion,
drug abuse, or prostitution
in order to bring additional depth to their central
theme. It's a little gross at times.
You don't need an abortion poster
to make transhumanism look like a topical
idea. I just think this is unnecessary
and crass. The Hengsha side quest
deserves special attention here. The idea
of forcing sex workers to need an anti-rejection
drug is a little too close
to one-to-one substitution for a real
problem. Sex workers being addicted,
often forcefully, to drugs as
a means of control. Like, making it so
the drug they need is because of an augmentation
is just crowbarring your silly sci-fi
concept into an already existing
real problem. The game isn't using
this sequence as a way of saying anything about
the sex industry beyond that it's bad
that trafficking happens, which, okay,
glad we're on the same page, and it's not saying anything
about augmentation except that I guess
it might add to an already existing
form of exploitation. It's here
so you can punch three guys and save a lady
and she can go, wow, you saved me
and then she evaporates.
We fade to black and she ceases to exist.
Did we just solve sex
trafficking? And we have to talk a little about
how prostitution is used in the game.
Sex workers are a large presence in both
main hubs and it feels like this was done to
make a point about how bad things are getting.
Like, the writers wanted to write a dystopian
future and their minds instantly went to
there's a lot of prostitutes everywhere.
I'm curious if the writers spoke to
any sex workers and asked them how
they felt about being used as a signifier
for societal collapse.
This problem is bigger than Human Revolution,
obviously. Prostitutes, and more specifically
Asian robo-prostitutes, have been a
fixture of cyberpunk fiction since
its inception. These stories have always
leaned on combining the mystery of future
technology with the exoticism
of foreign cultures. We certainly shouldn't
interrogate the Orientalism inherent
in that trope.
Alec, drop me off at the cyber brothel.
Please. I need to look for key cards.
The game is ham-fisted in how it
talks about augmentations because when
it comes down to it, the central question
it decided to focus on, whether we should
legislate human augmentation or not, just
isn't as complicated as it might have seemed
when they came up with it. Putting aside the
questions about what it means to be human,
the more tangible questions on the topic
are a bit simpler. For example, if
companies started developing prosthetic
arms that can shoot explosives and kill
everyone in an immediate radius, should
there be regulations on who can have those?
Uh...
Yeah! They should
probably ban the war crime blaster
before the NRA decided
every toddler's god-given right to
bear robot arms. In this footage,
I was trying to turn invisible and accidentally
hit the button right next to it and fat-fingered
my way into 12 consecutive
life sentences.
Pause the video and leave a comment
if you think the government shouldn't regulate
this. In order to make the questions seem
more complicated, the game draws zero
distinction between this and the types
of theoretical augmentation we can all
agree are great. Advanced prosthetics
that recreate actual sensory information
the way a hand would. Enabling people
who have lost limbs to completely replace
them. Fully functioning eye replacements.
Things like that would be magical
for a lot of people. The anti-augmentation
groups are written to hate those too.
Too much power can make you do terrible
things, Mr. Jensen. Zeke Sanders
ripped out his prosthetic eye because
he hates augmentations that much.
They're against all augmentations
for pseudo-philosophical reasons to do
with changing the core of humanity.
We can save people from illnesses,
amputation, disfigurement, disability,
but at what cost? Ooh!
Augmentations help a lot of people, Doc.
Handicapped, war vets. Yes, but at
what cost? I bet you thought I was joking,
didn't you? No, they actually say that.
Now, statistically, almost half the people
watching this are wearing glasses or
lenses like me. Many of you are watching this
on the phone they also use whenever they need
to check for information on almost any topic.
We've already been supplementing our bodies
and minds with technology for so long
we've almost forgotten we're doing it.
By surpassing our human limits,
we're destroying our humanity, defeating
the purpose of life. Oh, my God, you're totally
right. We need to rid the world of people
who supplement their bodies with those glasses?
So your options
in human revolution are between these
jokers who are anti-medicine
because ooh, what if life-saving surgery
takes away some of your soul? Several of
which turn out to be the fucking Illuminati
and we can't let the government
shut us down, Adam. Break into a police station
for me. Also, don't forget we installed
the secret explosion nightmare cannon in your body.
Check this shit out. Yee-haw!
The pro-regulation groups have to be
written to be extremely stupid
and working for the bad guys because otherwise
there's no contest. The issue is made
all or nothing. Corporations manufacturing
concealed carry buster swords
versus big government trying to ban
what, the concept of prosthesis?
Because that's the only way
to turn the central focus of the game
into something resembling a debate.
Human revolution feels like its heart is
in the right place, but it's afraid to say
too much, so instead you get this
really weak stuff like, uh, hey,
maybe the military-industrial complex
is bad.
You're right. The teacher
would just love having one of those things.
Yeah, if you think about it, making weapons
isn't as good for the world as making medicine.
Wow! Later when
riots start happening in Detroit,
the riots are about augmentation, of course,
the police have a police version of the robot
you were fighting before. That's kinda
cool. There's a point being made here by
the reuse of an enemy from other parts of the game.
You're literally seeing an enemy,
but on the side of the cops. I mean,
they got this idea from the original Deus Ex
when you started seeing rebranded versions of mechs
you'd seen before, but still. The game is saying,
hey, maybe it's bad the police
have tanks? They're arresting
tons of people in the street too, but this is
set dressing for the fact a riot is happening
because people don't like augmentation.
The commentary isn't, boy, the police really
are making a bad situation worse by taking
to the streets with automatic shotguns
and fucking tachycomas. The commentary is,
wow, things are really heating up about this augmentation
thing, huh? The cops really have their hands
full with all these crazy rioters. The game
respects the cops so much you get
hired to help them out during the same
level where they're arresting everyone using a
rocket mech. You can see what I mean, right?
This is okay as far as writing for a video
game goes, but terrible as far
as writing a story goes. It really
doesn't help that it feels like a few key steps
of the story got cut out due to time limitations.
In the second to last level, it's established
that all the major characters from the plot
can't be contacted because they're currently en route
to a sea base in the middle of the Arctic Ocean.
This travel time is important. Jensen
then encounters Zhao Yun-Ru, the lady
who tricked him earlier, who introduces the boss fight
with the biochip reveal. Then it turns out Jensen
needs to get to the Arctic Ocean base
everyone else went to to stop the conspiracy
happening there now, at which point it
conveniently turns out there's a special
person-sized rocket here which can launch
him to the other side of the world faster
than anyone's ever traveled anywhere on
Earth before, so he goes there
and Zhao Yun-Ru's there already.
She got here before you and she's the
final boss. Uh, hang on
a second. How did you get here? Was there
a second rocket stashed away somewhere?
Can you give me the cliff notes on what is
happening here? No wonder the last level
takes place in a giant hole.
Presumably in an earlier draft, there was
a level or two between these, creating
a time gap where it was plausible for Zhao Yun-Ru
to get to the middle of the Arctic Ocean.
When you land in the ocean in the cutscene,
you just spawn on a landing pad
next to all these helicopters where I assume
you were going to get dropped off for a
sensible reason in an earlier draft of the
story, or maybe they just didn't
care to explain this. I mean, Jensen
doesn't even look for her before he leaves.
She fucks up Jensen's augmentations,
walks off screen, and he forgets
she exists. Men never
fail to forget where women are in
physical space. Instead of building to
some larger question, it builds towards a
comical over-the-top video game zombie
movie climax. The big reveal
of the plot is that the Illuminati are figuring
out a way to control people using their
augmentations. Then one of them goes
rogue and presses a button that makes everyone
with an augmentation go insane. He does this
to make a point about augmentations being
bad. Adam Jensen, who didn't get
the replacement chip, or did but got an injection
of nanomachines, so he's fine.
That's the explanation they give. Saves the day
by flying to ground zero and turning it off.
This is a waste of the potentially realistic
and interesting ways you could have taken
this story. Instead of seriously exploring
the problems with centralization or
authorities like governments having control over
your life, it settles for the much less deep
question, would it be bad if the
Illuminati hacked your grandmother's
hip replacement and made her into a killing
machine? And the answer to that question,
shockingly enough, is, yeah, that would
be quite bad, but that's not science
fiction or cyberpunk or transhumanism
or discussing the implications of
future technology. That's just stupid.
You haven't told a story about
power and control. You wrote a cartoon
about how bad it would be if there was a big
button that killed everyone. You're not presenting
a nuanced issue here. You can
most easily identify the core problems
with the storytelling and how the game reuses
ideas that were in the original, but in the
complete opposite way. Okay, so
in Deus Ex, one of the big things about the Illuminati
and their offshoot, MJ-12,
is they're super pretentious. No one
names their AI algorithms Morpheus
or Daedalus unless they like the smell
of their own farts. Like, MJ-12's
organizational structure and clearance levels
are types of angel arranged in order
of closeness to the throne of God,
with the top one being literally God clearance
and the one below it being Seraphic,
like as in Seraphim. The founder of
MJ-12 is writing Bible fanfiction
and casting himself as
God. This isn't just a piece of
lore or meant to sound cool.
This is a joke. Bob Page,
the guy who started MJ-12, doesn't really
understand the teachings of the Illuminati
and thinks he's a genius, so to sound
clever, he named the structure of his
organization around stuff he thought sounded
deep. Seraphic? Wow,
I'm so smart. I'm a philosopher.
I'm fucking play two.
Page named the special AI he wanted
to use to take over the world Icarus.
This is a joke. He's trying
to sound cool, and it's really silly.
Like New Vegas with its Caesar cosplayer,
Deus Ex is making fun of how stupid it is
to try to sound clever by making surface
references to stuff people think is deep.
Cue Human Revolution, which bases
a shit ton of its imagery around the myth
of Icarus because it sounds deep.
♪♪
♪♪
♪♪
♪♪
I never asked for this.
Yay! Augmentation
is like Icarus' wax wings,
and the sun represents, uh,
augmentation turning out to be bad.
Look, I don't mean any offense to people
who thought this was clever when this trailer came out.
Demographically speaking, you were 15.
I'm merely giving you the opportunity
to consider that this might just look smart
while not actually saying anything
remotely relevant or useful
about the world we live in, and this shit
is omnipresent throughout the game.
The first Icarus thing you see
is the very first thing you see
in the game. The slow fall augmentation
is called the Icarus landing system.
There's a book you can read in the game
called Building Wings.
The game's title theme on the soundtrack
is called Icarus, of course. The tie-in novel
for the game was named Deus Ex Icarus Effect,
and then the tie-in novel
had a tie-in game for phones
and later the PC called Deus Ex
The Fall because, you know, Icarus
falling into the sea, which happens
to the character in the game too. That sounds
familiar. Oh, wait, because it also happens
to Adam both in the game and then
afterwards in the ending. He falls into the sea again
then. In this world, everyone is Icarus
drowning in the sea
of this symbolism. The Fall was
gonna have a slightly subtler title to begin with.
According to unused images in the game's files,
they were gonna call it Icarus Rising
and, like, I hope I'm not the first person to point
this out for you, but Sarif Industries' logo
is just a fucking wing and Tai Yong Medical,
their antagonist, their levels are all sun
themed. Look, the sun is coming from both
sides of the room at once because it's like they're
bathed in the sun. You know, Icarus
is natural enemy or something.
Tai Yong is named that because that's the Chinese
phrase for the sun. They wanted
to continue their sun Icarus metaphor
so they googled the sun in
Chinese. Sarif is a deliberate
pun on seraphim. Deus Ex
literally made a joke about people who think
referencing the seraphim is clever.
This is the shit Bob Page would come up
with if you made him write a Deus Ex game.
Even the man responsible explains his
motivations using a hackneyed Icarus
metaphor. I prefer to think of myself as
deadless, watching helplessly
as his child crashes into the sea.
Darrow is currently looking
into an ocean we just crashed
into as part of a previous unrelated
flying too close to the sun crashing
into the ocean metaphor. Watching
helplessly as his child crashes
into the sea. Read a second
Greek myth. I'm begging you.
Why do we build the wall? I think the moment
I knew the game was gonna be really misguided
was when one of the trailers flashed through a bunch
of generic We Are Smart imagery
and renaissance stuff and one of the things
that flashes up is a sign saying we don't let
augmented people in here. Like,
okay, segregation.
You're making a game about segregation,
a real thing that is horrible,
and you're also making a game about the cyber
renaissance and how cool it is to reference
the myth of Icarus. We flew too
close to the big yong, and you
know what that means?
Apartheid. It sucks because,
like, how many other games take their stories
seriously enough that a main character says something
like, hey, it's weird we spend most of our time
inventing weapons for the government, right?
I want to love any game that
takes that step, but when that's the
only step it takes and the other clever
thing he says was only in the trailer,
and the rest of the story is preoccupied with stuff
the original game made fun of for being
pretentious as shit, I've got to say
I don't think it's out of place to expect
a little more. Please, sir, can I have
some more delicious sauce?
Those elements mixed together is definitely
like a sauce. The story being this
simplistic makes the okay to mediocre
gameplay feel so much worse.
Even when the original was being annoying
or awkward to play, you were a few minutes
away from a truly fascinating conversation
you couldn't get anywhere else.
If you didn't like an aspect of the original's
story, a lot more stuff was going on.
Like the hacking minigame,
if you think the augmentation stuff in
Human Revolution is dumb, you can't escape it.
It's everywhere. At every moment,
right up until the plot manages to drag
itself over the finish line.
Human Revolution's
endings are what would happen
if a fart could die.
After defeating the final boss once she plugs
herself into a supercomputer powered by
screaming women, if that seems like it came out of
left field, that's because it did, you get to
pick how the game ends. Now, the original
game was criticized for how the endings weren't
based on your choices throughout the story or
their wider consequences, but instead on what
you chose to do in the final level.
Each of the endings had its own unique set of objectives,
but still, it means only the last
20 minutes of the game affects how the
story ends. The creators of Human
Revolution decided to give players something
to really complain about. Now you
pick an ending from one of three buttons at
a computer, which decides who gets blamed
for augmented people turning into zombies
for 40 minutes. There's also a fourth
button which destroys the entire ocean
facility, meaning no one has any idea
what really happened and everyone on the
facility, including Adam, dies.
You don't get to see what actually happens when you
press any button, though. The ending cinematics
are just shots of actual protests and shit.
Tinted yellow, obviously. Can't let
this actual news footage of real police
brutality ruin your visual aesthetic,
bro. Big bro.
This oil spill footage wasn't deep enough
so we made it cyber.
Think about it. Adam shoots
the shit about life, the universe, and
everything, and the credits roll. Then you
get a post-credits scene where Adam's ex-girlfriend
talks to Bob Page and the game cuts
to a title screen and the original Deus Ex
theme starts playing, as if to say,
do you get it?
Yes, I did get it. That was
what you were referencing. Thank you. These
endings have been criticized to hell and back already,
but what I find fascinating about that is how their
extreme badness rescued the
game from more hard-hitting criticism.
People complain about the endings and then
don't have room to talk about the incomprehensible
final boss who, just to make it clear,
I still don't know how to beat, the
you-win cinematic just seems to play on its
own eventually, or how the last level just
throws the whole gameplay structure out the window,
the second half's complete lack of
almost any side quests, and the fact you haven't
made a single impactive choice
in the game except how long you dawdle
in your office and whether to fall for
an obvious trap. The endings being
this memorably bad has almost
done the game a service. Hey, uh,
designers, if you're making a game
and you're worried it's a bit mediocre, have
the endings be complete shit. Just nosedive
it at the last possible second.
People will think your game is decent and just
let down by the endings and forget
they spent half of it in a vent looking for
the next forced hacking minigame.
All that said, at least Human Revolution
has endings. Mankind Divided just
ends by hacking.
["Human Revolution"]
["Human Revolution"]
["Human Revolution"]
It doesn't go that low.
Oh, you're kidding me. So that's
Deus Ex Human Revolution, a really
decent game with a pretty flawed story
and vastly simplified mechanics
and design from its predecessor in the hope
a streamlined experience would appeal
to more people than the original, and
to be sure, it did. It sold
and reviewed really well, and it
deserved to. If it didn't come with the baggage
and expectations of being a Deus Ex
game, I'd call it an okay but extremely
promising first game from a new
studio, and broadly speaking, I
think Mankind Divided delivered on many of
those promises five years later. You can
even pick up and throw plants now!
Hey, guys, you seeing this?
Why did no one
tell me about this?
Mankind Divided's quality is a story for
another video, but for now it's worth asking,
hey, it's been another five
years. Where's the sequel to Mankind
Divided? Where's MD2,
if you will? Well,
Deus Ex's corporate masters are
treating it about as well as they always have.
This version of Deus Ex has been
effectively abandoned, so we saw
Eidos Montreal work on the next Tomb Raider
and help out on the Avengers game and make
that Guardians of the Galaxy thing.
Several of the Deus Ex team's core
membership quit en masse and went off to another
studio a few years back. This includes
our old friend Francois Lapikus, whose
LinkedIn lists him as game director for almost
four years on a cancelled project
codenamed MD2.
I wonder what that might have been.
Immersive sims are hard to make and really
expensive if you want to compete with other
AAA games. Despite selling pretty well,
Mankind Divided didn't set the world
on fire the way it needed to to justify
continued sequels. It's possible
to make a game tons of people like,
but not enough to play all the way to the end
and whose sequel they might not even bother with
even if they have fond memories of the
previous one. I only started playing
Mankind Divided in preparation for this video
because I lost interest in the series after
liking Human Revolution okay, but
not being that into seeing more of the same.
And many of my friends who
remember liking Human Revolution way more
than me still haven't got around to playing it
either. What's the holdup?
Perhaps the gamble of making a simpler, more
generally marketable experience didn't
pay off quite as well as it seemed.
Maybe it's possible to make something thousands
of people like, but don't necessarily
love, at least not enough to
come back for more. Human Revolution
definitely has its diehard fans,
and that's cool, but a lot of its players
simply liked it and then stopped halfway
through to play something else and never came
back. Sure, making health systems
more like Call of Duty or adding cover
mechanics to make it more like Gears of War
might sound like a positive selling
point on a slideshow in a meeting,
but the people who love those games already have
a game that does them better than Human Revolution
did, and people who actually liked
Deus Ex's complexity don't get
that in Human Revolution. So
who would come back for more of this?
That's definitely not the whole story.
Square Enix and Eidos Montreal's
management certainly squandered all the good
will the developers had rightfully earned
with their pre-order bullshit and
in-game microtransactions bullshit
and the free-to-play game glued
to the side of a game people already
paid money for, but when it comes down
to it, as good as Human Revolution
was, the one thing it wasn't was
a sequel seller. Who's on the edge of
their seats to find out what happens next
to endings like these? Also,
you know, it's a prequel. We kind
of know what happens next.
Deus Ex was once a game people loved
so much, a company decided it was worth
making another one many years later.
Do people love Human Revolution
the same way, or do they simply
like it? I think that if
Human Revolution had come out two years after
the original Deus Ex on a slightly
updated version of the original's engine,
people would instantly see what's lacking about
it, dismiss it as a mediocre imitator
that didn't really understand what makes
the original work. It would have been hated
for the crime of failing to be
as good as the best video game ever made.
I wonder if that's common in gaming
culture, but it didn't come out two years
later. It came out a decade later
in a market that hadn't seen anything like
it for a long time. It was a relief
a game even a bit like Deus Ex
could still get made. It was a breath
of fresh air to the 2011 game
industry. It's just that when you compare
it with the games it's trying to be like,
it doesn't hold up quite so well. The quality
of other recent immersive sims,
including Mankind Divided, demonstrates
the true classics of the genre are as good
as they are because they dedicate themselves to doing
what they do well. The first Deus Ex
was a niche game, a weird
complicated experience for a certain
type of nerd. Us nerds loved
it, and it sold pretty well, though
not super amazingly. I'm pretty sure
Human Revolution outsold it, but many
developers working today are openly
inspired by the first Deus Ex.
I'm genuinely curious how many
developers are specifically inspired
by Human Revolution instead.
So where do we put this guy on my list of every video game ranked in order of objective value?
It's weird how no one thought to make one of
these before. With heavy heart, I have no
choice but to put this game on the very
bottom of the list. There.
As of the time of this video,
Deus Ex Human Revolution is the worst
game ever made. Oh, I forgot to add
Fallout 3, the second worst game ever made.
But hey, DXHR fans, try
not to think of it that way. Try and think of it
as the third best game. Maybe it'll
even work out better than the next Gex.
Gex! Gex! Gex! Sadly,
it seems Square Enix are looking for fresh
victims. In December last year, while I was
deep in the making of this video and had already
written a bunch of jokes for the conclusion about what
lessons Square Enix needs to learn in time for the
new Gex game, I had a really good joke about
making sure Gex doesn't ride any elevators.
Trust me. Squeenix went out and filed
a new trademark for the Gex IP,
making the intended joke of this video
no longer a joke. They killed
Thief, they killed Deus Ex, and
they think they can take on a third. Let me
be the first to say, good luck
guys. When you come at the king,
you better not miss. And if Gex
has to do a single fucking
hacking minigame...
♪♪♪
♪♪♪
♪♪♪
Hey, thanks for watching.
I'm sorry. At the
end of another long video, I promised I wouldn't
make a video any longer than I already had.
It's really embarrassing that I keep making
things way longer. I tried.
I really tried. I cut out a whole 15
minutes about the history of mirrors in video
games and made it a bonus video for patrons
in the hopes of getting the length under control
and it just kept growing. Thanks to all
my patrons for allowing me to survive while
making this. In case you're wondering,
no, this isn't my normal recording setup.
I'm actually visiting my producer
on my way to a wedding and it
turns out that she has
put some foam up in her closet
so I'm just recording here for now.
If any of the voiceover sounds bad,
it's her fault.
And in case you asked, yes, these are
the clothes I intend to wear for the wedding.
I didn't bring any smart clothes to wear
for recording the live action part of this video.
And I forgot to bring shoes, so
hopefully no one looks at my feet.
I don't know why I brought that up.
I went to Birmingham for
a different wedding, like,
four years ago and my car
got broken into and my nice
shoes were stolen and I never got
replacements.
So
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
I've actually tried to make a video
about Deus Ex Human Revolution.
Every year and a half I've, like,
restarted since
2016. It was, like, the second long
video I wanted to make and I just kept
giving up because the
video script ballooned to a length
where I was like, this is unwatchable.
And I only finished it this time because I just
accepted I have to make
a video that's too long to get
this thing out of my brain and move on with my life.
And now I'm finally free
and I can move on to other things, which is lovely.
So
the next game I want to review
is the Deus Ex
Human Revolution Director's Cut
and that is not a joke.
And I'm scared.
I'm scared about what is
happening to me.
