Hello, everyone.
Today, we're going to be talking about the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki during the Second World War.
And let's start today by telling a story.
So, at the conclusion to the Second World War, Japan, though their military forces had been soundly defeated,
stubbornly refused to negotiate an end to the conflict.
Their militaristic leaders had committed to total war in defense of the Japanese Empire,
and were prepared to mobilize Japanese civilians to combat any potential American invasion.
President Harry Truman and his advisors were therefore faced with a difficult choice.
Either they could commit to a long and costly invasion of Japan,
which they estimated would kill more than a million people,
or they could use their secret weapon, the world's first nuclear bombs,
which the United States had recently constructed.
So, in order to shorten the war and avoid the need for an invasion,
Truman decided to drop two bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, two major military and industrial targets.
Demonstrating the extent of the Japanese military's desire to keep fighting, however,
even after these bombs were dropped, Japan's Supreme Council remained deadlocked,
with some military leaders still refusing to consider negotiating a peace.
It took the unprecedented intervention of Emperor Hirohito to break the impasse in the council,
and finally convinced the military to stand down,
bringing an end to the war.
So, that's quite a simple story there.
And presented like this, dropping the nuclear bombs was pretty unambiguously the right and moral thing to do,
when compared to the worse alternative, anyway.
What this is is a basic trolley problem.
You might not like dropping the nuclear bombs,
but if the only other option on the table is a long, costly invasion
that is definitely going to kill and injure even more people,
then the bombs become acceptable.
And justifiable.
And this is a popular and enduring perception of the events that led to the nuclear bombs being dropped,
that they were used specifically to force Japan to surrender, without the need for an invasion.
However, this is Fleet Admiral William D. Leahy,
who was the senior-most United States military officer on active duty during World War II,
and the personal chief of staff to Presidents Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry S. Truman.
And after the war, with regards to the nuclear bombs, Leahy wrote the following.
It is my opinion that the use of this barbarous weapon at Hiroshima and Nagasaki
was of no material assistance in our war against Japan.
The Japanese were already defeated and ready to surrender
because of the effect of sea blockade and bombing with conventional weapons.
Fleet Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, who was commander-in-chief of the U.S. Pacific Fleet during World War II,
said, at a speech given on October 5th, 1945,
the Japanese had, in fact, already sued for peace before the atomic age was announced to the world
with the destruction of Hiroshima, and before the Russian entry into the war.
The atomic bomb played no decisive part, from a purely military standpoint, in the defeat of Japan.
And this is General Dwight Eisenhower, who was supreme commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force in Europe
during World War II, and later President of the United States.
And his opinion of the atomic bomb was that the Japanese were ready to surrender,
and it wasn't necessary to hit them with that awful thing.
And Eisenhower later wrote in his memoirs about a conversation he had with War Secretary Henry Stimson,
in which he states,
It was my belief that Japan was, at that very moment, seeking some way to surrender.
And in 1944, President Roosevelt directed Henry Stimson to put together a survey team
to write a report on the effectiveness of the Allied aerial bombing tactics during the war.
Published in 1946, this strategic bombing survey came to the conclusion that Japan would have surrendered
even if the atomic bombs had not been dropped, even if Russia had not entered the war,
and even if no invasion had been planned or contemplated.
So, what's going on here, then?
The people I just quoted there were all involved in the Second World War
in important positions of political and military power.
And instead of viewing the bombs as a necessary lesser-of-two-evils,
they instead see them as everything from simply militarily unnecessary to a grave moral crime.
Now, obviously, if these people are correct that the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
were not necessary to end the war,
then the trolley problem version of the story we told at the start of the video can't be true, can it?
So, this is what we're here to investigate today.
Which of these versions of history is closer to the truth?
We're going to take a look at the closing months of the Second World War
in the lead-up to the atomic bombings.
And I think we should start today by briefly introducing
the various people that we're going to be talking about,
a few of whom we've mentioned already.
So, first off, in the United States, we have President Franklin D. Roosevelt,
who was in office for most of the Second World War.
Roosevelt died on April 12, 1945,
meaning that his vice president, Harry Truman, became president,
and he was in office for the remainder of the war,
including the period when the nuclear bombs were dropped.
Working for Truman, we have Chief of Staff Admiral William D. Leahy,
who was one of the people we just quoted who thought the bombs were unnecessary,
Secretary of War Henry L. Stimpson,
who was the person to whom Eisenhower voiced his misgivings about the bomb,
and Secretary of State James F. Burns.
And, spoiler warning, this man in particular makes a lot of very poor decisions.
Leahy and Stimpson both served in the same roles under Roosevelt,
but James F. Burns was appointed Secretary of State by Harry Truman on July 3, 1945.
The nuclear bombs themselves were constructed by the Manhattan Project,
which was directed by General Leslie Groves,
and the actual laboratory that designed the bombs was headed by J. Robert Oppenheimer.
Over in Japan, at the top of the Japanese government, we have Emperor Hirohito,
and he was advised by the Supreme Council for the Direction of the War.
The Supreme Council had six members, and they, for the most part,
fell into two factions, the Moderates and the Hardliners.
So for the Moderates, we have Prime Minister Kantaro Suzuki,
Minister of Foreign Affairs Shigenori Togo,
and Minister of the Navy Mitsumasa Yonai.
And for the Hardliners, we have Minister of War Kurechika Anami,
Chief of the Army General Staff Yoshijirō Umezu,
and Chief of the Navy General Staff Soemu Toyoda.
We'll get more into the differences between these groups in a little while,
but generally the Hardliners favored a more hardline military strategy,
and the Moderates were more... moderate.
Also important for us here is Naotake Sato,
the Japanese ambassador to the Soviet Union,
who was in frequent contact with Minister of Foreign Affairs Shigenori Togo.
And the messages sent between Togo and Sato are key to understanding
the thinking of the Japanese leadership at the time.
Outside of the US and Japan, we have British Prime Minister Winston Churchill
and Premier of the Soviet Union Joseph Stalin.
I don't know if you've ever heard of them.
Now, of course, there were many more people than this
involved in the end of the Second World War,
and I'll be mentioning more people going forward.
This list comprises only the most principal actors
in the particular events that we're going to be talking about today.
As well as people, there's going to be a lot of dates and events to remember here,
so I'm going to be using a calendar going forward
so that we can keep track of everything.
The two atomic bombs were dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki
on the 6th and 9th of August, respectively.
And we've also already mentioned the inauguration of Harry Truman on the 12th of April
and his appointing of James Burns to Secretary of State on the 3rd of July.
As we go through the events leading up to the bombings,
I'll add more to this calendar and highlight which days I'm talking about in particular,
and hopefully this will help us to keep organized.
Before all that, though, there is one important event we need to know about
prior to the Second World War,
and that's the Russo-Japanese War fought between 1904 and 1905.
Now, I won't dwell on this too long,
but the very quick Wikipedia summary goes like this.
The Russo-Japanese War was fought between the Russian and Japanese empires
over rival imperial ambitions in Manchuria and Korea.
So it's two empires fighting over land and influence in Asia, basically.
Anyway, in this war, Russia suffered a series of humiliating and surprising defeats
at the hands of Japan, a nation that Russia was expecting to beat relatively easily.
Perhaps most notable of these defeats is the Battle of Tsushima,
where virtually a whole Russian fleet was sunk by the Japanese navy
who suffered only minor losses themselves.
Russia was forced to sue for peace,
which was mediated in the United States by President Theodore Roosevelt,
and the resulting treaty saw Russia withdrawing their troops from Manchuria,
recognizing Japan's claim to Korea, as well as ceding a bunch of territory.
All this coupled with the fact that the Japanese Empire had initiated the war
with a surprise attack on the Russian-occupied Port Arthur
meant that the Russians were, to put it lightly, rather ticked off about the whole affair.
The disastrous Russian performance in the war
is considered one of the main instigating factors behind the 1905 Russian Revolution,
but that's a story for another day.
So to summarize and generalize a bit,
Russia held a grudge against Japan for beating them in a war
and denying them influence and territory in Asia.
This is all important in the context of the Yalta Conference,
which took place between the 4th and 11th of February there.
This was a meeting of Stalin, Churchill, and Franklin D. Roosevelt
to discuss, among other things, the post-war reorganization of Europe.
Nazi Germany was on its last legs at this point, its defeat was inevitable.
Adolf Hitler shot himself on the 30th of April,
and the German high command surrendered unconditionally on May the 7th.
And the Yalta Conference was held to discuss and negotiate
the various things that should happen following that upcoming Nazi defeat.
The main focus of the conference was Europe,
but important for us here is that the Soviet Union's entry into the war against Japan was discussed.
Churchill and Roosevelt wanted Stalin to declare war on Japan.
Specifically, they wanted him to invade Japanese-occupied Manchuria,
which would make Japan have to fight on an extra front and spread their resources thinner,
and this would hopefully hasten their defeat.
Now, this was a little bit awkward as Russia and Japan had signed a non-aggression pact in 1941,
and that wasn't due to expire until 1946.
Despite this non-aggression pact, Stalin also wanted Russia to declare war against Japan.
However, he wanted something in return.
So on the 11th of February, the Allies signed a secret protocol
agreeing that Russia would enter the war against Japan,
two or three months after Germany has surrendered and the war in Europe is terminated.
And the price for Russia's doing so was that the former rights of Russia
violated by the treacherous attack of Japan in 1904 shall be restored.
And then they're all listed there.
So basically, Stalin was asked to declare war on Japan after the war in Europe was finished,
and he said, okay, but we want back all the stuff that Japan pinched off us back in 1904.
Churchill and Roosevelt agreed, and so the deal was made.
And this deal was kept secret for a few reasons, mainly because Russia is very big.
It was going to take quite a bit of time for the Soviet Union
to transfer military forces from the west to the east,
and they didn't want to risk tipping Japan off to the impending invasion of Manchuria
before it was ready to go ahead.
President Roosevelt, for his part, thought this was a fair deal.
He later stated that the Russians, quote,
"...only want to get back that which has been taken from them."
However, James Burns, then acting as advisor to Roosevelt at Yalta,
worried that the more the United States asked of the Soviet Union,
the more they would demand in return.
Writing in his memoirs after the war,
Burns makes it clear that he thinks too much was conceded to the Russians at Yalta,
although he is careful to give reasons as to why he thinks
the late President Roosevelt made the decisions he did.
Burns does point out, however, that at the time the terms of the secret protocol were decided upon,
he didn't know about them and thus had no influence over them
because he was not Secretary of State.
Mr. Stettinius was Secretary, referring to Edward Stettinius Jr.,
who was Roosevelt's Secretary of State at Yalta.
This is important for us here because although Truman kept on
other of Roosevelt's staff after his death,
he chose to replace Stettinius,
feeling that too many concessions had been made to the Soviet Union at Yalta.
And his new pick for Secretary of State was James Burns,
a choice which signals a change towards a more aggressive stance with regards to Russia.
Which leaves the United States in a bit of an awkward situation, diplomatically speaking.
Under the previous President and Secretary of State,
they'd signed a secret agreement with the Soviet Union,
assuring them various concessions in exchange for going to war against Japan.
But then that President died and his Secretary of State was replaced.
And the incoming President and Secretary of State
aren't at all as keen on conceding anything to the Russians.
And I wonder if that's going to cause any problems down the line.
So let's leave the Allies in their awkward situation there
and discuss what the Japanese government was up to during this time.
And to oversimplify a little, throughout this whole period,
the Japanese leadership had basically a single main aim.
And that was to avoid having to accept an unconditional surrender
and instead achieve a negotiated peace.
The Supreme Council in Japan knew that they couldn't win the war,
but they wanted peace on terms that they could negotiate.
Nazi Germany, of course, was forced to accept an unconditional surrender by the Allies.
Unconditional surrender here meaning surrender without any guarantees being made to the losing side.
And Japan was very keen to avoid a similar fate.
The main sticking point was the question of Japan's imperial institution
and the fate of the Emperor in particular.
The Emperor was more than just a regular old leader in Japanese society.
He was a revered, quasi-divine figure of particularly special importance.
And with his position as the head of the Japanese government,
and importantly, the Japanese military,
Japan accepting unconditional surrender meant that the Emperor could then conceivably be arrested
and tried for war crimes and possibly even executed.
This was something that Brigadier General Bonner Fellers, when advising General MacArthur,
described as comparable to the crucifixion of Christ to us.
The United States was very aware of the special position of the Emperor
and the gravity of the question of what should be done with him,
but we'll get to that a little later.
Now, there were disagreements in Japan's Supreme Council
about what exact peace terms they should attempt to negotiate.
On the more pessimistic, or realistic, end of the scale,
we have Japan just getting out of the war however they can
with the preservation of the imperial institution.
So basically accepting whatever peace terms are offered
so long as they guarantee the Emperor's position.
And on the more optimistic, or unrealistic, end of the scale,
we have Japan getting out of the war while securing the preservation of the imperial institution,
securing the preservation of Japan's military forces,
avoiding a foreign occupation,
maintaining Japan's occupied overseas territories,
and ensuring any trials for Japanese war crimes were carried out by Japan.
Now this was all never going to happen, obviously, but it was argued for.
The hardline militarists on the council were very keen on the preservation of the military,
believe it or not.
Holding out for these terms was obviously a desperate long shot,
but these were equally desperate men.
Regardless of these disagreements though,
the Supreme Council was unified on the first point.
They were absolutely not going to lose the Emperor,
and therefore they want to avoid an unconditional surrender at any cost.
And they pursued this goal both militarily and diplomatically.
And let's talk about military strategy first.
So the militarists on the Supreme Council
favored a strategy of making the war so difficult for the Allies
that they would lose their taste for unconditional surrender
and decide to negotiate peace,
rather than fight on for another year or so at huge cost to themselves.
So Japan wasn't going to win the war.
They knew that.
But they were going to end it on terms that were more acceptable to them.
The council anticipated an upcoming Allied invasion of Japan
and planned to throw everything they had at it,
including civilians,
in order to wear down the Allied will to fight and thus secure better terms.
A similar situation played out in miniature on the island of Okinawa.
Now, Okinawa was occupied by the Japanese military,
and when the US military invaded it,
local inhabitants of the island, including children,
were conscripted by the Japanese military and sent to die by the thousands.
And by the time Okinawa was captured by the Allies on July the 2nd,
both the Japanese and US militaries had lost considerable amounts of lives and military equipment.
It was both a very costly loss and a very costly victory.
President Truman, for his part, was very concerned about the losses at Okinawa
and feared that committing to a full invasion of Japan could mean, quote,
"...an Okinawa from one end of Japan to the other."
So that's the Supreme Council's military strategy there.
Diplomatically, the council's plan was to convince the Soviet Union
to mediate a peace between Japan and the other Allies,
much like the United States that mediated peace at the end of the Russo-Japanese War.
Japan was counting on the pact of neutrality they had with the Soviet Union
to keep the Russians out of the war.
They hoped that they would have a better chance at securing favorable peace terms
if they had the Soviet Union backing them up,
and in exchange for helping them with negotiations,
the Japanese leadership was prepared to offer Stalin
various territorial concessions from their empire.
Now, unfortunately for the Japanese people,
both the military and diplomatic strategies of the Japanese leadership were,
to put it bluntly, rubbish.
To take the diplomatic strategy first,
in trying to persuade Stalin to help them out,
they were bargaining from a position of weakness.
They had nothing to offer the Soviet Union
that it was not in a position to just take for itself.
Stalin didn't want the war to end
before he'd had the chance to invade and recapture the territory
that had already been promised to him at the Yalta Conference.
So why bargain with Japan in exchange for helping them
when you could just invade them and take whatever you like?
Stalin wanted to be in at the kill, as he put it,
and he wasn't about to grant Japan a stay of execution.
To accomplish this impossible diplomatic task,
Minister of Foreign Affairs Shigenori Togo
sent frequent messages to Japan's ambassador in Moscow,
Naotake Sato,
instructing him to somehow convince the Russians to help Japan broker peace.
Now, Sato was rather a lot more realistic than his colleagues back in Tokyo.
He knew the Russians,
he realized that the Council's plan was almost certainly not going to work,
and he didn't mind telling them.
In a series of increasingly frank messages
sent in response to Togo's instructions,
Sato attempted to make his superiors see sense.
And let's quote a few of his cables here.
It seems extremely unlikely that Russia would flout the Anglo-Americans
and the opinion of the entire world
by supporting Japan's war efforts with either moral or material means.
I believe in the long run Japan has indeed no choice
but to accept unconditional surrender or terms closely equivalent.
I believe that Stalin feels there is absolutely no necessity
for making a voluntary agreement with Japan.
On this point, I see a serious discrepancy between your view
and the actual state of affairs,
which is a wonderfully insulting line there.
Togo, however, didn't appreciate his subordinate's candor.
He responded to one of Sato's complaints, quote,
"...in spite of your views, you must carry out your instructions.
Endeavor to obtain the good officers of the Soviet Union
in ending the war short of unconditional surrender."
And this is the general pattern of communication that went on between the two.
Togo asked Sato to do the impossible.
Sato attempted to explain that it was impossible.
Togo told him to shut up, shut your face, just do it anyway, please.
Thank you.
And it's worth noting here that the Allies had cracked the Japanese communication codes
and were freely reading Japan's messages,
so they were privy to all of this information,
as well as Togo and Sato's back-and-forth comedy routine they were working on.
Now, militarily, the strategy of the Supreme Council
was just as ill-fated as their diplomatic efforts.
Expecting the opposing side to lose their nerve and call it quits faster than you
when it's your territory being invaded and occupied is quite a risky strategy.
It's also a strategy that hinges on the enemy first doing something that you expect them to do,
that being here to invade Japan at all.
An Allied invasion of Japan was not guaranteed to happen.
The United States was working on plans to possibly invade Japan
should it be necessary,
but we should not make the mistake of thinking that because an invasion was being planned for
that it was an inevitability.
President Truman wrote in his diary on the 17th of June,
shall we invade Japan proper or shall we bomb and blockade?
And this is before the Trinity test,
before Truman knows that he has nuclear bombs to work with
or the effectiveness of those nuclear bombs.
Before that, he's presenting an invasion as only one possible way forward.
At the start of the video, I quoted several US military leaders
who thought Japan would have surrendered prior to an invasion being necessary,
regardless of the use of nuclear bombs.
For example, Admiral Leahy, who described Japan as
already defeated and ready to surrender.
But just how defeated was Japan?
Let's briefly talk about the state of the Japanese military.
So firstly, by the middle of 1945, the Japanese Navy was virtually non-existent.
Every Japanese aircraft carrier had been either sunk or disabled,
hundreds of warships had been destroyed,
and after the United States captured Okinawa,
Japan's few remaining battleships were either decommissioned
or used as stationary anti-aircraft platforms
because Japan simply lacked the fuel to keep them moving.
Outside of suicide attacks by small vessels,
the Japanese Navy had ceased to exist,
and that's not a rhetorical flourish by me there,
that's a quote from the US summary report of the Pacific War.
In the air, Japan was faring no better.
There was a shortage of bombers, fighters, trained pilots,
materials to construct aircraft out of, and fuel to keep them in the air.
As you'll probably be aware, by the end of the war,
Japan was resorting to suicide missions carried out by poorly trained pilots
instructed to simply crash their planes into enemy ships.
Due in part to the rushed training of the pilots
and the increasingly poor construction of the aircraft they were flying,
fewer than a fifth of these planes actually hit their targets.
On the other side, the United States Air Force
was conducting constant bombing raids on targets inside Japan,
basically as it pleased, meeting little to no resistance in the air.
General Curtis LeMay, the man in charge of America's air offensive against Japan,
later claimed that he did not lose a single B-29 bomber to Japanese fighters.
And to quote the strategic bombing survey I mentioned near the start of the video,
United States planes crisscrossed the skies
with no effective Japanese air or anti-aircraft opposition.
Given its collapse both in the air and at sea,
a naval blockade was able to be put in place around Japan,
which firstly was absolutely devastating for the Japanese economy.
Almost their entire merchant fleet was picked off and destroyed,
and imports of vital resources like coal, crude oil, iron ore, and rubber stopped.
As a result, many Japanese ports, such as the one at Hiroshima, simply ceased to operate.
The blockade also had the effect of dramatically reducing
the scattered Japanese ground forces' ability to communicate, resupply, and redeploy.
Without their navy, Japan's troops were increasingly under-supplied
as well as stranded wherever they happened to be.
So, given the absolutely dismal state of the Japanese military situation,
it is presumptuous of the Supreme Council to assume
that the United States had to commit to a costly ground invasion at all.
The Americans could, if they wanted to, simply maintain their naval blockade and bombing campaign,
and there would be very little that the Japanese leadership could do about it.
They were counting on the United States first launching an invasion,
and only then losing faith in it.
Of course, another possibility is that the United States could decide
they didn't want to do a ground invasion before they'd started one,
which is, of course, what happened, but we're getting a little ahead of ourselves there.
Now, it is clear from their awful, unsalvageable military situation
that Japan's leaders should have surrendered much sooner than they did,
and indeed, some wanted to,
but so long as the hardline militarist faction in the Supreme Council insisted on continuing the war,
there was little that those who desired peace could do about it.
Directly, anyway.
Behind the scenes, members of the Japanese leadership
who realized that the war needed to be finished were working on plans to that end,
but we'll get to those in due time.
For now, though, the Supreme Council remained deadlocked,
and the terribly sad thing about all this is that while the leadership of Japan waited uselessly
for either an American ground invasion or rescue from the Soviet Union,
their civilian population centers were being systematically destroyed.
And here we need to introduce the concept of strategic bombing,
that being the intentional targeting of enemy cities with area bombing raids
with the aim of destroying the enemy's morale and industry.
Now, strategic bombing is interesting in that its name changes depending on who is doing it to whom.
When we're doing it to them, it's called strategic or morale bombing,
and it's a calculated, emotionless tactic intended to bring a swift end to the war
by breaking enemy morale and disrupting their war industry.
When they're doing it to us, on the other hand, it's called terror bombing,
and it's a cowardly, despicable tactic intended to instill fear in the population
by the ruthless slaughter of innocent women and children.
It all depends on your point of view, really.
The strategy of indiscriminate area bombing had been used prior to World War II,
but it was during the war that it really got up to speed.
The Nazis were targeting civilians with bombs from the very start of the war,
and notably one of the aims of their Blitz bombing campaign against cities in the United Kingdom
was to break the morale of the British civilian population.
The British Royal Air Force began the war favoring precision,
tactical bombing strikes against specific targets,
but they soon got with the times and adopted an area bombing strategy against German cities,
one of the aims of which was to break the morale of the German civilian population.
And there were two main branches of thinking behind making civilians the target of bombing raids.
There's the material reasoning and the psychological reasoning,
and we'll talk about the material reasoning first.
So, why spend time and resources trying to exclusively bomb small, mobile military targets
that can fight back when you can just fly behind those targets
and bomb the factories and shipyards that are producing them?
And those factories and shipyards supplying the military,
they're staffed by civilians who usually live in nearby houses.
They're also culpable to some degree for keeping the war machine going, right?
And if we bomb them, there will be fewer workers to work at those factories,
and therefore will reduce the enemy country's production and end the war quicker.
So it's not that we want to bomb civilians, you see,
it's simply that we think this will be less painful in the long run.
Now, cities aren't solely comprised of war factories and worker housing, of course.
But all the other things in the city,
the non-military industries that keep those workers alive,
the hospitals that heal them when they're sick and injured,
the schools that educate their children,
all these things are connected in varying degrees
to the functioning of that society's capacity for war.
So, following this logic, you can just bomb everything
by, in effect, reclassifying everything in the city as a military target.
Once you've done this, bombing civilians is impossible,
because there are no civilians.
The city is just one big military installation.
Now, it is worth noting here that the United States did not enter the war with this mindset.
In 1939, President Roosevelt sent an appeal to
refrain from air bombing of civilians to various countries,
and that reads as follows.
"...the ruthless bombing from the air of civilians in unfortified centers of population
during the course of hostilities which have raged in various quarters of the earth
during the past few years, which has resulted in the maiming and in the death
of thousands of defenseless men, women and children,
has sickened the hearts of every civilized man and woman
and has profoundly shocked the conscience of humanity."
If resort is had to this form of inhuman barbarism
during the period of the tragic conflagration with which the world is now confronted,
hundreds of thousands of innocent human beings who have no responsibility for,
and who are not even remotely participating in,
the hostilities which have now broken out, will lose their lives.
"...I am therefore addressing this urgent appeal to every government
which may be engaged in hostilities publicly to affirm its determination
that its armed forces shall in no event and under no circumstances
undertake the bombardment from the air of civilian populations."
So, some very high-minded words from a leader not yet in the war there.
A few years later, however, the United States was in the war
and its military leaders saw things a little differently.
And to quote General Curtis LeMay,
"...there are no innocent civilians.
It is their government and you are fighting a people.
You are not trying to fight an armed force anymore,
so it doesn't bother me so much to be killing the so-called innocent bystanders."
LeMay's bombing strategy proceeded exactly as if he rarely believed
there were no innocent civilians in Japan.
Once Allied bombers were able to reach Japan,
mass fire bombings of Japanese population centers began,
killing and displacing hundreds of thousands of civilians.
The fire bombing of Tokyo on the 9th and 10th of March
killed an estimated 100,000 people by itself and made a million more homeless.
So, in the course of just a few years,
the bombing of innocent civilians went from inhuman barbarism
to there are no innocent civilians.
Civilians were just another military asset to be bombed
as far as the Allied air force was concerned.
Now, the other line of reasoning for strategic bombing
was the possible psychological effects
that would result from the bombing of civilian population centers.
Those being that perhaps the population would lose faith in their government
or the soldiers on the front lines would be demoralized
by their families and homes being bombed while they were away,
and all this would therefore lead to an increased likelihood for the enemy to surrender.
And the material reasoning for the bombing
was often used merely as a pretext for this actual psychological aim.
Winston Churchill let this slip in a memo he drafted on the 28th of March
in which he addresses the controversial bombing of Dresden
which took place between the 13th and 15th of February.
In this memo, Churchill says,
"...it seems to me that the moment has come
when the question of bombing of German cities
simply for the sake of increasing the terror,
though under other pretexts, should be reviewed.
Otherwise, we shall come into control of an utterly ruined land.
The foreign secretary has spoken to me on this subject
and I feel the need for more precise concentration upon military objectives
such as oil and communications behind the immediate battle zone
rather than on mere acts of terror and wanton destruction, however impressive."
So, bombing simply for the sake of increasing the terror,
though under other pretexts.
So you're bombing civilians to break enemy morale
and if anyone gets squeamish about that, you say,
oh, don't worry, I know we hit a few schools and hospitals there
but we were actually aiming at that factory a few streets over
that makes boots for the army or something.
Every city had something or other in it that supported the armed forces in some way,
and thus there was always a handy excuse for indiscriminately area bombing anywhere.
Now this strategy is, and was at the time, very controversial,
not just from a moral standpoint,
I mean, that's obvious, you're blowing up innocent people,
but it was also controversial in terms of its effectiveness.
And first let's talk about the effectiveness of area bombing's material goals.
Firstly, even with the enormous amount of bombs which were dropped on Nazi Germany,
the country's production actually increased throughout the war.
And this happened for a few reasons,
one of which was that Nazi Germany used millions of people as slave labor.
Many German factories were staffed by prisoners.
When you're a fascist regime occupying whole other countries,
lives are very cheap.
Also, whatever damage was done to German industry
during indiscriminate area bombing raids on cities was relatively minor,
because, to quote the Strategic Bombing Survey,
Now you could say Nazi Germany's production would have increased further
without the area bombings, of course,
but we're not talking about reducing production,
then we're talking about slowing down the increase of production,
which is less likely to be a major contributing factor to a surrender.
We also have to consider here that while your air force is bombing civilian housing
with the aim of breaking their morale,
they're not bombing other things which it might be more useful to bomb.
The Strategic Bombing Survey concludes that Allied bombing raids on,
for instance, the Nazis oil refineries and transportation network,
were key to hastening the end of the war.
In particular, it calls the targeting of Germany's railways and waterways
the decisive blow that completely disorganized the German economy.
It also concludes that the importance of careful selection of targets for air attack
is emphasized by the German experience.
The Germans were far more concerned over attacks on one or more
of their basic industries and services,
their oil, chemical, or steel industries,
or their power or transportation network,
than they were over attacks on their armament industry or the city areas.
So the specific targeting of key industries and transport networks
was more effective than indiscriminate area bombing
and the destruction of civilian housing, basically.
Next, let's talk about the psychological effectiveness of area bombing.
The thinking that area bombing would lead to a surrender caused by a breakdown in morale
turned out to have a few flaws.
Firstly, on the government end,
militaristic, totalitarian, fascist regimes
don't care about the opinions or well-being of their civilians.
So they're not likely to throw in the towel
just because lots of ordinary people are getting killed or injured or made homeless.
They don't care about that.
Caring about people is not high on the list of priorities for totalitarian fascist regimes.
On the civilian end, there's several reasons
why trying to break their morale didn't lead to the end of the war.
You know, beyond their government's not caring what they think.
Firstly, as much as people might be terrorized by indiscriminate bombing raids,
they were also already being terrorized by their own governments
and the police force of those governments.
It's one thing to have your morale shaken
and decide things would be better if Hitler was gone,
and it's another thing to translate that into action and go and fight the Gestapo.
Someone might not like having their city bombed and their house burnt down,
but that doesn't necessarily mean they're gonna go out
and rebel against the government and risk being executed.
This is Arthur Harris, perhaps better known as Bomber Harris,
who was the commander-in-chief of RAF Bomber Command
during the height of the Second World War,
and he oversaw the United Kingdom's area bombing campaign against German cities,
including the bombing of Dresden.
Now, as you might be able to tell from his nickname,
Bomber Harris was a very enthusiastic supporter of area bombing,
and he was also a very enthusiastic supporter
of being honest about the point of area bombing.
And let's read a quote of his from 1943.
"...the aim of the combined bomber offensive should be unambiguously stated
as the destruction of German cities, the killing of German workers,
and the disruption of civilized life throughout Germany.
The destruction of houses, public utilities, transport and lives,
the creation of a refugee problem on an unprecedented scale,
and the breakdown of morale both at home and at the battlefronts
by fear of extended and intensified bombing
are accepted and intended aims of our bombing policy.
They are not byproducts of attempts to hit factories."
So when he said this, he was clearly in favor of area bombing as a tactic,
and also in favor of being honest about the aim of it.
The point was to disrupt civilian life, kill people, and spread fear.
However, after the war, Bomber Harris changed his mind.
In his 1947 book, Bomber Offensive,
Harris writes that while in 1941 it had seemed like a good idea
to use area bombing to break the enemy's morale,
in the long run it proved to be wholly unsound.
And I quote,
"...when we had destroyed almost all the larger industrial cities in Germany,
the civil population remained apathetic,
while the Gestapo saw to it that they were docile,
and insofar as there was work left for them to do, industrious."
Morale bombing was comparatively ineffective
against so well organized a police state as Germany.
The German leaders themselves admitted after the war
that morale was bad after our attacks on their towns,
but they distinguished between the morale and the conduct of the workers.
Conduct, they say, was unaffected.
In other words, there was nothing unarmed Germans could do about it
with the Gestapo standing by and with the concentration camp round the corner.
So that's the failure of morale bombing
from someone who was previously both very in favor of it
and directly responsible for it there.
And the Strategic Bombing Survey also covers the same topic, saying,
"...if they," that's the German civilians,
"...had been at liberty to vote themselves out of the war,
they would have done so well before the final surrender.
In a determined police state, however,
there is a wide difference between dissatisfaction and expressed opposition."
About the nicest thing you can say about this morale bombing idea
is that some people apparently thought it might work, but it didn't.
And it just so happens that in the course of it not working,
it pointlessly killed, injured, and displaced
a very large number of innocent civilians.
Attempts to break the morale of the German citizenry
with terror bombing tactics led to apathy, not revolutionary action.
And not to get too armchair general on you all here,
but I don't mind concluding that every single bomb that was dropped on a German house
would have been better put to use if it was dropped instead on a German railway line
or something else of actual military significance.
However, I would like to make clear here that by no means am I saying
we should absolve the entire German citizenry of all fault in the Second World War.
Many civilians were, of course, committed supporters of the Nazi Party
and often participants in its various crimes.
When I say innocent civilians, I absolutely do not mean those people.
However, many German citizens were innocent,
many were persecuted by the Nazis themselves,
or many were children, for instance,
and sadly, indiscriminate area bombing does not discern between these groups of people.
Now, all this is important for us today
because the manner in which the atomic bombs were targeted and used
was merely an extension of this morale bombing philosophy.
So let's talk a little about that.
In the months before the atomic bomb was used,
a group of scientists and military personnel dubbed the Target Committee
was established by director of the Manhattan Project, General Leslie Groves,
and this group met several times to discuss how the bombs should be used.
And the minutes of the meetings of the Target Committee
give us an insight into the thinking behind the target selection for the bombs.
On the 10th of May, the group met in the office of J. Robert Oppenheimer,
who was the head of the laboratory that designed the bombs
and one of the scientists on the committee.
And they discussed various points relating to how the bomb should be used.
One key point for us here is the section
Psychological Factors in Target Selection, and that reads as follows.
It was agreed that psychological factors in the target selection were of great importance.
Two aspects of this are one, obtaining the greatest psychological effect against Japan,
and two, making the initial use sufficiently spectacular
for the importance of the weapon to be internationally recognized
when publicity on it is released.
So when picking targets here, they're not just thinking
about the psychological effects upon the inhabitants of Japan,
they're also already thinking about the effects the bomb will have outside of the war.
They want the bomb to be sufficiently spectacular,
like they're setting off a big firework or something.
Furthermore, still under the psychological factors heading regarding Hiroshima,
it was put forward that Hiroshima has the advantage of being such a size
and with possible focusing from nearby mountains
that a large fraction of the city may be destroyed.
That's an advantage, remember.
So in picking Hiroshima as a target, they were aiming to destroy a large fraction of the city
due specifically to the associated psychological factors.
Reading these minutes, it is clear that the members of the target committee
were much more focused on the psychological effects of the bomb
than its practical physical effects upon Japan's military capabilities.
Regarding this, they write,
Use against military objectives. Nice use of quotation marks there.
It was agreed that for the initial use of the weapon,
any small and strictly military objective should be located in a much larger area
subject to blast damage in order to avoid undue risks
of the weapon being lost due to bad placing of the bomb.
So they didn't want to bomb an isolated, strictly military target
for fear of missing and losing the weapon.
Whereas if they drop the bomb on a city,
missing their air quotes, military target is just fine
because a large fraction of the city will still be destroyed regardless
and therefore the bomb will still convey the very important psychological effects.
Now, I don't know any way of reading this other than
it's okay if we don't actually hit a military objective
so long as we still hit a city.
Actual material effects upon Japan's military capabilities
were clearly not of prime importance here.
It is very telling that the top of their target list was Kyoto,
the former capital of Japan, which was of relatively little military significance
but enormous psychological importance.
They also include the ludicrous reasoning that since Kyoto is an intellectual center for Japan,
the people there are more apt to appreciate the significance of such a weapon,
as if the inhabitants of the other cities of Japan would be simply too unintelligent
to understand the significance of their city being exploded.
In the end, of course, Kyoto was not hit with an atomic bomb.
General Leslie Groves wanted very much to bomb Kyoto,
but after a lot of stalling, it was reluctantly taken off the list of targets
on the persistent and repeated orders of Secretary of War Henry Stimson,
who, and yes, this is the actual reason, once went there on holiday.
At a meeting of the Interim Committee on the 31st of May,
Stimson described Kyoto as exclusively a place of homes and art and shrines,
and argued it must not be bombed.
The minutes of this meeting on the 31st of May reveal the confusing
and contradictory list of requirements for the bomb targets.
And let's read a little from the section
Effect of the Bombing on the Japanese and Their Will to Fight.
After much discussion concerning various types of targets and the effects to be produced,
the Secretary expressed the conclusion, on which there was general agreement,
that we could not give the Japanese any warning,
that we could not concentrate on a civilian area,
but that we should seek to make a profound psychological impression
on as many of the inhabitants as possible.
Now, this doesn't make a whole lot of sense.
If you aren't concentrating upon a civilian area,
how do you make a profound psychological impression upon as many inhabitants as possible?
It's not going to make much of an impression on the Japanese population
if you drop the bomb on some isolated military target somewhere where no one will see it.
It would just be one more thing that got bombed that day.
This was brought up in the meeting when someone, quote,
"...pointed out that one atomic bomb dropped on an arsenal
would not be much different from the effect caused by any air core strike of present dimensions.
However, Dr. Oppenheimer stated that the visual effect of an atomic bombing would be tremendous.
It would be accompanied by a brilliant luminescence,
which would rise to a height of 10,000 to 20,000 feet."
So that's the key thing here that's supposed to differentiate the nuclear bombs
from the conventional bombing raids.
It's not the material effect upon Japanese military capabilities,
it's how impressive they look.
Now, of course, if you want to create a profound psychological effect
with your big, impressive-looking bomb,
you need to drop it somewhere where people can see it.
So how do you drop the bomb on a strictly military target
while ensuring there are lots of Japanese inhabitants around to see how tremendous it is?
The members of the meeting wriggled their way out of this conundrum with the following euphemism.
The most desirable target would be a vital war plant employing a large number of workers
and closely surrounded by workers' houses.
So we're not bombing a civilian area, to be clear.
We are not aiming at houses.
We're aiming at a factory closely surrounded by houses.
And if we happen to miss the factory, that's okay.
We won't lose the bomb because it will still destroy a large fraction of the city, remember.
But again, we're not targeting the civilians, we promise.
What a load of rubbish, honestly.
They want to bomb civilians, they have decided to bomb civilians,
and they know it, but they're too cowardly to admit it.
So they're pretending the desired effects of the bomb
will merely be the byproduct of an attempt to hit a factory, as Bomber Harris put it.
Now Secretary Stimpson went along with this ridiculous euphemism,
or at least contented himself with having saved his pet city of Kyoto.
The other target cities were placed on a no bomb list,
meaning that they were not to be targeted by the Air Force
with conventional bombings prior to being hit with the atomic bombs.
This was because another desired attribute of the potential bomb targets
was that they were, as far as possible, undamaged,
so as to better demonstrate the destructive power of the atomic bomb.
They want a spectacular show, after all.
Now this requirement speaks to the relative military
unimportance of the cities that ended up making the list.
They were thus far undamaged, in part because they were not high-priority military targets.
This is something for us to keep in mind
when considering those justifications for the atomic bombs
that highlight whatever military industry existed in Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Because whatever military industry existed in those cities
did so specifically because they were not being attacked,
initially because of the city's relative unimportance
compared with higher value bombing targets,
and following that because they were on this no bomb list.
Allied bombers had attacked dozens of Japanese cities with conventional weapons.
Tokyo was extensively firebombed months before the atomic bombs were dropped.
There was nothing stopping Allied bombers from also attacking the list of target cities
if they were supposed to be so important to Japan's military efforts,
except for the fact that they were being preserved, on purpose,
to be destroyed with atomic bombs.
Now, of course, before the bomb was used in the field, it was first tested.
And the timing of the first nuclear test detonation, codenamed the Trinity Test,
caused a problem for President Truman,
as the upcoming Potsdam Conference in Germany
meant that he personally would be out of the country.
Truman actually wanted to delay the Potsdam Conference
until a little while after the Trinity Test,
so that he would know, going into diplomatic negotiations there,
whether or not he had the nuclear bombs to play with.
But he had to settle for getting the news while he was at the conference.
Now, before we get into talking about the Potsdam Conference,
I'd just like to recap what our principal actors are up to here.
So, Truman was stating his intent to get Russia to commit to the Japanese war,
and he later wrote that it was his main objective in going to Potsdam.
The Soviet Union was ignoring Japan's peace feelers
and, per the secret agreement they made at Yalta,
preparing to void the non-aggression pact they had with Japan and invade Manchuria.
Japan was organizing a diplomatic mission to travel to Moscow
and meet with Stalin directly,
in order to hopefully convince him to negotiate an end to the war.
This diplomatic mission was led by Prince Fumimaro Konoe.
Now, Konoe was a prestigious politician and former prime minister
who, prior to the war, had advised against attacking America.
He thought Pearl Harbor was a mistake,
and he was very critical of the hardline militarists,
stating in a report to the Emperor in February of 1945
that they were the greatest obstacle to a termination of the conflict,
and that, even though they knew they would lose,
they are likely to continue fighting to the very end,
merely to save face.
So, the selection of this chap to head the diplomatic mission to Russia
sends a clear message here.
The Emperor wants the war over,
and he wants to send Konoe to talk to Stalin to get it done.
To prepare for the arrival of this mission,
Togo messaged Sato to set up a meeting between Konoe and Stalin,
and sent ahead the text of a message from the Emperor himself
that Konoe was to bring with him.
And this message reads as follows.
"'His Majesty the Emperor,
mindful of the fact that the present war daily brings greater evil and sacrifice
upon the peoples of all the belligerent powers,
desires from his heart that it may be quickly terminated.
But so long as England and the United States
insist upon unconditional surrender,
the Japanese Empire has no alternative but to fight on with all its strength
for the honor and existence of the Motherland.'"
Now, Stalin got this message, but made no immediate response.
He, too, was heading to the Potsdam Conference,
and that's what we're going to talk about next.
So, the Potsdam Conference took place
between the 17th of July and the 2nd of August.
Now, this conference was similar to the Yalta Conference
in that it was a meeting of the leaders of the Soviet Union,
United Kingdom, and United States
to discuss various matters related to the post-war organization of Europe.
However, in the time between the two conferences,
a few important things had changed.
Firstly, as we've mentioned,
the US President and Secretary of State had changed,
and Truman and Burns wanted a harder line on Russia.
We don't need to get too deep into it here,
but negotiations with the Soviet Union
regarding various matters related to Europe
had become increasingly difficult.
Plus, the Nazis were out of the war by now,
which meant there was less incentive for the other Allies
to concede to Stalin's demands.
Another important change was the completion of the Nuclear Bomb Project.
The Trinity Test was conducted early in the morning on the 16th of July,
just prior to the Potsdam Conference,
and the test was a success.
The Manhattan Project scientists demonstrated
that they could detonate a nuclear bomb.
Now, though the leadership of the United States
had intended to get the Soviet Union into the war against Japan,
all the things we just mentioned
contributed to an important shift in opinion on that issue
that was going on behind the scenes.
And two diary entries written by President Truman at Potsdam
make clear this shift in opinion.
The first comes on the 17th of July,
when Truman met Stalin for the first time,
and they discussed various matters,
including Russia's entry into the war against Japan.
Truman's diary account of the conversation reports
that Stalin will, quote,
"...be in the Japanese War on August 15th."
Finny the Japanese when that comes about,
although Truman uses a free letter shorthand for Japanese
that I won't repeat here on account of it being a racial slur.
So the indication from this diary entry on the 17th of July
is that Truman thinks that Japan is close to being finished off,
and that Soviet entry into the war is what is going to do it.
And he furthermore wrote a letter to his wife while at Potsdam,
stating, "...I had gotten what I came for.
Stalin goes to war on August 15th with no strings on it."
And he goes on to mention how this means he thinks the war will be shorter
and fewer lives will be lost as a result.
So Truman seems positively enthusiastic about Soviet entry into the war right here,
and it is interesting to note that Truman's belief
that Japan will be finished off by a Soviet declaration of war
means that he already thinks a US invasion of Japan is unnecessary.
The second entry into Truman's diary I want to talk about comes the very next day.
Now, Truman had been informed of the success of the Trinity test already on the 16th of July,
but it's here on the 18th that he first gets an indication
of just how powerful the atomic bomb was.
Henry Stimson received a coded message describing an explosion
that could be seen for hundreds of miles,
and he relayed this to Truman, who he described as
"...greatly reinforced and highly delighted upon hearing the news."
And writing in this diary on this day, Truman says the following,
"...believed the Japanese will fold up before Russia comes in.
I am sure they will when Manhattan appears over their homeland."
So here, Truman is presenting the bombs as an event that will preempt a Russian invasion
as the thing that will cause the Japanese to fold up.
This was an opinion shared by James Burns,
who later wrote in his memoirs that, during the Potsdam Conference, quote,
"...I would have been satisfied had the Russians determined not to enter the war.
Notwithstanding Japan's persistent refusal to surrender,
I believed the atomic bomb would be successful
and would force the Japanese to accept surrender on our terms.
I feared what would happen when the Red Army entered Manchuria."
James Burns also rather candidly admitted in a post-war interview that, quote,
"...it was ever-present in my mind that it was important
that we have an end to the war before the Russians came in.
Neither the president nor I were anxious to have them enter the war
after we'd learned of this successful test."
So here, Burns is directly tying the desire to keep the Russians out of the war
to the news coming in from the Trinity test.
And Walter Brown, who was assistant to James Burns at Potsdam,
wrote in his diary on the 24th of July
that Burns told him he believed that, after the atomic bomb was dropped,
Japan will surrender and Russia will not get in so much on the kill.
So the plan was to get Russia to invade Manchuria,
something that would likely finish the war.
But finishing the war with Russia's help
does mean having to deal with Stalin being at the negotiating table afterwards.
And given the difficulty of how the European negotiations are going,
and how Roosevelt, God rest his soul,
has already gone and promised Stalin a bunch of concessions for helping out,
maybe it wouldn't be such a bad thing
if Russia ended up not being necessary here after all.
And since the Trinity test was just a big success,
we now have these very destructive nuclear bombs to play with.
And maybe when we use these,
Japan might surrender, to us specifically,
before Russia even declares war.
And wouldn't that be handy?
And I'd like to point out two more things about this diary entry on July the 18th.
The first is that Truman writes
he believes the Japanese will fold up before Russia comes in.
He does not write,
I believe the Japanese will fold up before a US invasion of Japan is necessary.
An invasion of Japan is already off the table here, as far as Truman is concerned.
Truman and Barnes are not presenting the bombs
as an alternative to a US invasion of Japan as a means to end the war.
They are presenting the bombs as an alternative
to a Soviet invasion of Manchuria as a means to end the war.
The second thing I'd like to point out about this diary entry
is that Truman writes the Japanese will fold up
when Manhattan appears over their homeland.
And that's when, not if.
Truman writes about the use of the nuclear bombs
as a thing that simply is going to happen,
and then he speculates about the effects they will have.
Nowhere here is the thought that the bombs might possibly not need to be used.
As Truman later states in his memoirs,
I regarded the bomb as a military weapon
and never had any doubt that it should be used.
And this is concerning in light of the fact that on July 18th,
Truman learned of the message that the Kanoe mission was to deliver to Stalin.
After meeting with Churchill, Truman notes in his diary
that Stalin had told PM, that's Prime Minister Churchill,
of telegram from the Japanese emperor asking for peace.
Stalin also read his answer to me.
It was satisfactory.
As for what Stalin's satisfactory answer was,
we can read this account of Admiral Leahy's of a meeting ten days later.
Stalin enlivened the proceedings by reporting that on July 18th,
he had received a request from Japan to mediate for them with the Allies to end the war.
He said this request included a proposal
to send a royal prince of Japan to Moscow as chief of the mission.
The Generalissimo said that his reply was that the proposal was too vague
to warrant his approving a meeting with the proposed mission.
Stalin then says that he had that day received another message from Japan
attempting to clarify the purpose of the mission,
but that he was going to send the Japanese the same response.
Leahy concludes that it was clearly evident that Stalin was at that time
determined to enter the war against Japan,
which plainly was to the advantage of Russia now that Japan was certain to be defeated.
So Tokyo is sending messages to Stalin asking for him to mediate and enter the war,
and he's avoiding answering them directly and instead repeatedly asking for clarifications,
and he's clearly just buying time while he prepares for an invasion.
More like Joseph Stalling.
Anyway, to get back on track, President Truman knows at Potsdam
that the Japanese leadership are, in his words, asking for peace.
So given that, why, we might wonder,
was there no doubt in Truman's mind about the need to set off nuclear bombs
in the middle of civilian population centers?
Now, we could simply say that Truman had resolved to drop the atomic bomb on civilians
in order to force a Japanese surrender on favorable terms
before the Soviet Union invaded Manchuria.
However, this interpretation of events seemingly conflicts
with another diary entry that Truman wrote on the 25th of July,
when, talking about the upcoming bombings, he says,
This weapon is to be used against Japan between now and August 10th.
I have told the Secretary of War, Mr. Stimson,
to use it so that military objectives and soldiers and sailors are the target,
and not women and children.
He and I are in accord.
The target will be a purely military one.
So, what's going on here?
Truman states in this diary entry
that the bomb is going to be used against a purely military target.
Now, by no stretch of the imagination
can the middle of a civilian population center
be considered a purely military target.
It is, in fact, the exact place you would drop the bomb
if you were trying to target women and children.
If the middle of a city counts as a purely military target,
then there is nowhere the bomb could be dropped
that would not count as a purely military target,
making the question of whether to drop it on a purely military target or not completely pointless.
And he's talking to Henry Stimson,
who, of course, knows the bomb is going to be dropped on a city,
but has apparently tricked himself into believing the lazy euphemism
about a war plant surrounded by workers' houses being a purely military target.
Truman and Stimson are acting like the bomb is going to be dropped
on a military base or an airfield or something,
and then patting themselves on the back for not dropping it on civilians.
For whatever reason, Truman is thinking about the bomb
as though it is only going to affect enemy soldiers.
He seems to understand that it would be wrong to drop the bomb on civilians,
but not that that is exactly what is about to happen.
As for why this is, there are three possible explanations that I can imagine.
The first is that Truman genuinely thinks the bomb is not going to be dropped on civilians
and that the target list only includes military bases or something.
In this version of events, Truman is told by Stimson
that the bomb is going to be dropped on a purely military target,
believes him, and is later surprised by the fact the bombs have actually been dropped on civilians.
And so he orders that no more nuclear bombs should be dropped without his express permission,
which is something he did do after the second bomb was dropped, by the way.
Then I guess he realizes that he's massively screwed up,
but decides to just run with it and pretend that was the plan all along,
because that's easier at that point than admitting the enormous incompetence
and being like, sorry, I didn't actually mean to blow up two cities, that's my bad.
The second explanation is that Truman is simply deluding himself.
He knows exactly what the target is, but he's convincing himself it's something else.
If he really thought about it, he'd know that the bomb was not going to land on a purely military target,
so he's not thinking about it, and he's deceiving himself.
The third explanation I can imagine is that Truman is just consciously lying.
He knows the bomb is not going to be dropped on a purely military target,
but he's falsely claiming that that is what he believes at this point in time.
And I suppose this could have been done with an eye on his place in the history books,
or to protect himself if there was any significant repercussions after the bombs,
then he could have pointed to this and claimed,
hey, I ordered them to be dropped on military targets, you can't pin this on me.
All these options are just speculation on my part, however.
If I was forced to guess, I'd say he was probably deceiving himself,
but I do not know the actual reason why Truman wrote
that the bombs were only going to be used on military targets.
I only know that for whatever reason. When he wrote that, he was wrong.
Now, leaving the nuclear bombs to the side for a moment,
I wouldn't blame someone for asking at this point.
If Truman and Burns are apparently so anxious to get the war over with before the Russians get involved,
and they knew at Potsdam that the Emperor was asking for peace,
why was peace not able to be negotiated sooner than it was?
Why, when they heard the Emperor wanted peace,
did they not simply send him a message saying, great, okay, let's negotiate peace?
And the answer to that is the deadlock over unconditional surrender.
As we know, Japan was committed to avoiding an unconditional surrender,
but Truman was likewise committed to securing one.
He didn't want to accept what the Japanese were offering, which was a negotiated peace.
He wanted a full unconditional surrender.
Now, various individuals within the Allied governments and armed forces
understood that insisting on absolute unconditional surrender was,
particularly with regards to the question of the Emperor,
going to cause problems and possibly prolong the war.
While at the Yalta Conference, Winston Churchill suggested that mitigating the terms of surrender,
quote, would be worthwhile if it led to the saving of a year or a year and a half of war
in which so much blood and treasure would be poured out.
But President Roosevelt was unreceptive to Churchill's suggestion.
Not to be deterred, however, Churchill tried again when talking to Truman at Potsdam,
and he later gave an account of the conversation.
I dwelt upon the tremendous cost in American life and to a smaller extent in British life,
which would be involved in forcing unconditional surrender upon the Japanese.
It was for him to consider whether this might not be expressed in some other way,
so that we got all the essentials for future peace and security,
and yet left the Japanese some show of saving their military honor
and some assurance of their national existence.
However, Churchill found this president as unreceptive as the last.
Truman, quote, countered by saying that he did not think the Japanese
had any military honor after Pearl Harbor.
But Churchill responded that, at any rate,
they had something for which they were ready to face certain death in very large numbers,
and this might not be so important to us as to them.
Others attempted to influence Truman on the unconditional surrender issue at various times,
sometimes seemingly having more luck than Churchill there.
Under Secretary of State Joseph Grew, who understood the importance of the emperor
having been US ambassador to Japan for a decade, advised Truman on the 28th of May
that the greatest obstacle to unconditional surrender by the Japanese
is their belief that this would entail the destruction
or permanent removal of the emperor and the institution of the throne.
And Grew goes on to say that without an assurance
that the imperial institution would not be destroyed,
a Japanese surrender would be highly unlikely.
And he further notes that the president said that he was interested in what I said
because his own thoughts had been following the same line.
Another of Truman's advisors who took a similar line was Secretary of War Henry Stimson,
who spoke to Truman on the 2nd of July
on the issue of drafting surrender terms for Japan, stating that
"...I personally think that if we should add that we do not exclude
a constitutional monarchy under her present dynasty,
it would substantially add to the chances of acceptance."
And Stimson later wrote in his diary that Truman was, quote,
"...apparently acquiescent with my attitude towards the treatment of Japan."
Now, I think there's two possibilities here.
The first is that President Harry S. Truman
was one of those intensely annoying people
who simply agree with whatever the last person they spoke to said to them,
showing absolutely no respect for future historians
attempting to figure out what they actually thought about anything.
The second is that Truman was actually sympathetic
to what his advisors were advising him
with regards to softening unconditional surrender,
but there was some other influence preventing him from acting on that advice.
And we perhaps see a hint of this at a meeting on the 18th of June,
when this time, Admiral Leahy tried his luck
at pushing for a softening of unconditional surrender,
stating that "...our insistence on unconditional surrender
would result only in making the Japanese desperate
and thereby increase our casualty lists."
And Truman responded that
"...he did not feel that he could take any action at this time
to change public opinion on the matter."
So, the opinion of the public
is being factored into the decision-making process
regarding Japanese surrender terms.
And I think it's fair to say that the United States public
were not the biggest fans of Emperor Hirohito.
A Gallup poll conducted on the 29th of June reported
that when asked what the fate of the Emperor should be after the war,
the most popular response was,
"...execute him."
So any US president with an eye on public opinion
is in a bit of a tricky position
when it comes to openly telling Japan they can keep their emperor,
especially if said US president
has a history of calling for unconditional surrender.
Just about the only person not advising Truman
to soften the surrender terms was James Burns,
who will later rather dramatically state
that Truman appearing to back down from unconditional surrender
would lead to the crucifixion of the president.
All of this is complicated by the fact that behind the scenes,
the leadership of the Allied military
did not desire to get rid of the Emperor.
In fact, there was actually a pressing military reason
to retain the Emperor.
And to quote a meeting of the Combined Chiefs of Staff
that took place on the 16th of July
when discussing unconditional surrender,
it was suggested that,
"...if, for instance, an interpretation could be found
and communicated to the Japanese
which did not involve the dissolution of the Imperial Institution,
the Emperor would be in a position to order the ceasefire
in outlying areas,
whereas if the dynasty were destroyed,
the outlying garrisons might continue to fight
for many months or years."
So the proposal here is to leave the Emperor in place
and use his influence to convince
the scattered Japanese troops to stand down,
whereas if they simply kill or imprison the Emperor,
that might prompt the troops to fight on.
So Truman's being pulled in different directions here.
Strictly militarily speaking,
letting Japan keep the Emperor makes a lot of sense.
It will almost certainly shorten the war,
save lives,
and be the thing to convince the Japanese military to give up.
Conveying that message to the Japanese leadership
prior to their surrender, though,
is potentially risky from a domestic political standpoint.
If you've previously been calling for unconditional surrender,
you don't want to be seen as reversing position on that
and giving in to a hated enemy's demands.
However, the threat of the Soviet Union's expansion into Asia
means you do want to end the war quickly.
So there's conflicting motivations here,
and these conflicting motivations came to influence
the construction of the Potsdam Declaration.
Now, this was a statement issued by the Allies on the 26th of July
that called for the unconditional surrender of Japan,
saying,
"...we call upon the government of Japan to proclaim now
the unconditional surrender of all Japanese armed forces
and to provide proper and adequate assurances
of their good faith in such action."
The alternative for Japan is prompt and utter destruction,
and it laid out various terms,
such as the occupation of Japanese territory by the Allies,
the disarming of the Japanese military,
and so on.
Notably, however,
the Potsdam Declaration did not contain any mention of the Emperor,
which you might think is rather odd,
given that the Allies clearly know how important
the question of the Imperial Institution was to the Japanese leadership.
However, it did state that
"...the authority and influence of those who have deceived and misled
the people of Japan into embarking on world conquest
must be eliminated for all time."
And this is rather vague with respect to exactly who it means.
Does the Emperor count as one of those who have misled the people of Japan?
When the Japanese leadership received the Potsdam Declaration,
the hardliners on the Supreme Council interpreted this in a very unfavorable way
and took it to be an indirect threat to the Emperor's life.
Another confusing point for the Japanese leadership
was that when the Potsdam Declaration was issued,
it was signed by the United States,
Britain,
China,
and, interestingly,
not the Soviet Union.
To the Supreme Council, this inspired a question,
as well as a fair bit of false hope.
If the Soviet Union didn't sign this declaration,
does that mean that they possibly disagree with the declaration?
What is Russia's position here?
Since they didn't sign the document calling for our unconditional surrender,
does that mean they might be open to negotiating better terms for us after all?
After receiving the Potsdam Declaration, Togo met with the Emperor to discuss it.
The Emperor thought that the terms of the declaration were, quote,
"...acceptable in principle,"
but he agreed to postpone a response until after they had heard back from the Soviet Union.
So Togo sent a message to Ambassador Sato on the 28th of July
with instructions to attempt to sound out the Russian attitude towards the joint declaration.
Ambassador Sato, for his part, had had just about enough of this nonsense.
He had been repeatedly saying that the Russia plan was not going to work,
and yet here's another message from Tokyo postponing surrender
in order to ask what the situation is with the Russians.
Sato's messages in response were openly insubordinate
and strayed into brazenly telling Tokyo what to do.
Sato said, and I'm paraphrasing here,
"...look, if Stalin disagreed with the terms of the Potsdam Declaration,
he would have negotiated better terms at the time.
And if he wasn't able to negotiate better terms at the time,
he's not going to be able to do that now, is he?
The Soviet Union is not going to help you.
In fact, if you don't immediately surrender, they are probably going to declare war on you."
The Supreme Council, on receiving these messages, finally saw sense and decided to end the war.
No, I'm joking, Sato was ignored, obviously.
So the Potsdam Declaration contained no direct information about the fate of the Emperor,
and it left open the question of the Soviet Union's position,
which prompted the Japanese leadership to postpone a response until they knew what that was.
Until then, their official position was to ignore the declaration.
So if the Potsdam Declaration was intended to produce a surrender from Japan, it failed.
However, when the Potsdam Declaration was first drafted
by the Office of Secretary of War Henry Stimson, it included the following point.
"...the occupying forces of the Allies shall be withdrawn from Japan
as soon as our objectives are accomplished and there has been established beyond doubt
a peacefully inclined responsible government of a character representative of the Japanese people.
This may include a constitutional monarchy under the present dynasty."
So that is a concrete offer to retain the imperial institution right there.
And earlier drafts of the Potsdam Declaration also included among the signatories
the generalissimo of the Soviet Union.
So, what happened here then?
Well, between the first draft leaving Stimson's office and it being issued publicly,
the Potsdam Declaration went through various drafts.
Most importantly for us here, the document was edited by President Truman and James Burns.
The final draft, of course, saw the Soviet Union being removed from the list of signatories
and the offer to retain the imperial institution deleted.
Firstly, on the issue of the Soviet Union being removed from the declaration,
President Truman simply writes in his memoirs that
"...Stalin could not, of course, be a party to the proclamation itself
since he was still at peace with Japan."
So that's Truman's stated reason for excluding the Soviet Union from the declaration.
The Soviet Union is not yet in the war
and technically still has a non-aggression pact in place with Japan.
But why, we might ask, does this mean that the Soviet Union
can't sign a document calling for Japan to surrender?
I mean, Truman's stated intent for going to Potsdam
was to convince the Russians to violate that non-aggression pact
and have their military attack the Japanese military.
So I'm going to go ahead and assume that respect for the sanctity of non-aggression pacts
is clearly not the reason here.
And if Truman is implying that he was worried that the Soviet Union signing the document
would lead to war between Russia and Japan,
well, that's what he's supposed to want to happen.
In fact, the Soviet Union's exclusion from the final draft of the document
came as an enormous surprise to the delegation from the Soviet Union,
who had written their own draft of the Potsdam Declaration,
which included themselves as signatories.
So they clearly wanted in on the signing of the document.
Instead, the Soviet delegation was not consulted about the drafting of the declaration
and were only told it was being released to the press
at the same time it was being released to the press.
Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs Molotov
submitted a request to delay the publication of the declaration,
but James Burns claimed he didn't get the message in time.
Hmm.
As for why the Soviet Union wanted to be included among the list of signatories,
Stalin and Molotov wanted a pretext
to abandon their non-aggression pact with Japan and invade Manchuria.
And the Potsdam Declaration's ultimatum to Japan would have provided that pretext.
So, after being edited out of the declaration, they tried a more direct approach.
In a meeting on the 29th of July,
Molotov submitted a request from Stalin for the United States,
England, and the other Allies, quote,
to address a formal request to the Soviet government for its entry into the war.
Now, this put Truman and Burns in a very awkward position,
because, of course, they're supposed to want the Soviet government to enter the war,
but they clearly don't anymore.
As Burns later wrote in his memoirs,
"...we had, of course, begun to hope a Japanese surrender might be imminent,
and we did not want to urge the Russians to enter the war."
Truman and Burns figure they just have to wait a week or so
for the first nuclear bomb to be dropped,
and then Japan will surrender before the Soviet Union has a chance to declare war and invade.
So being asked directly for an invitation to the war put Truman on the spot,
and he sidestepped the issue.
The Soviets will get no invitation from him.
However, an interesting note here is that
when the Soviet Union does actually declare war on Japan,
they say they have acceded to the Allied request to join the war.
So they didn't get an invitation, but they just acted like they did anyway.
Now, of course, excluding the Soviets from the Potsdam Declaration
and dodging their request for an invitation to join the war
confirmed to Stalin that Truman was planning to finish the war without him.
So while at Potsdam, Stalin ordered his generals to speed up their invasion plans.
He wasn't going to be left out of the kill.
So I think it's fairly clear why the Soviet Union was excluded from the Potsdam Declaration.
Burns and Truman are planning to finish the war without Stalin,
and that includes not having Stalin's signature on the surrender papers.
So when Japan surrenders, it will not be, in any way, a surrender to the Soviet Union, is the plan.
The second important added to the Potsdam Declaration
was the removal of the offer to retain the Imperial Institution.
And the reasoning for this change is found in the diary of Henry Stimson, who writes that,
"...when the Potsdam conditions were drawn and left my office where they originated,
they contained a provision which permitted the continuance of the dynasty with certain conditions.
The President and Burns struck that out.
They were not obdurate on it, but they thought they could arrange it
in the necessary secret negotiations which would take place after any armistice."
So Truman and Burns think the position of the Emperor is a matter to be negotiated
after Japan has already surrendered.
And they're both convinced that the nuclear bomb
is definitely about to force an unconditional surrender from Japan.
Remember that Truman is, quote,
"...sure that Japan will surrender when Manhattan appears over their homeland."
So given that, why should they make any concessions beforehand
and risk an unnecessary backlash?
Truman and Burns plan to use the bomb to make Japan surrender unconditionally
before Russia joins the war, and anything else,
like the position of the Emperor, can simply be sorted out afterwards.
So here's the situation we're in at the end of the Potsdam Conference.
The Japanese leadership is still refusing to accept an unconditional surrender,
but Truman is refusing to accept anything less,
even though on the principle point, the fate of the Emperor,
both sides are in agreement.
They don't want to get rid of the Emperor.
But since neither side wanted to blink first, the deadlock remained.
Japan waited for rescue from the Soviet Union that would never come,
and the United States moved forward with the atomic bombings.
The first atomic bomb was dropped in the center of Hiroshima on August 6th
at about 8.15 in the morning.
It exploded directly above a hospital, immediately killing everyone inside.
Within the immediate blast radius were the Honkawa and Fukuromachi Elementary Schools,
which were completely destroyed, instantly incinerating hundreds of schoolchildren.
This is the purely military target right here.
Now my video is about the reasons why these bombs were dropped,
not the actual explosions themselves.
There are many sources for first-hand accounts of the terrifying effects of the atomic bomb,
and you can look those up yourself if you're in a particularly good mood today
and would like to ruin it.
I'll just say here that tens of thousands of civilians,
including thousands of schoolchildren,
were killed, permanently injured, and disfigured
in a number of cruel and horrible ways.
Many of those not killed by the initial blast
also suffered the effects of radiation poisoning,
which killed and made seriously sick many more people.
Altogether, between the two atomic bombs,
it's estimated that between 129,000 and 226,000 people were killed,
and the vast majority of these were innocent civilians.
This is particularly true in the case of Nagasaki,
where it is estimated that of the tens of thousands of people who were killed,
only 150 of them were soldiers.
When the leadership of Japan got news of the Hiroshima bomb, they discussed what to do.
Foreign Minister Togo saw in the bomb a chance to end the war,
and he argued at a meeting on the 7th of August
that Japan should now accept the terms of the Potsdam Declaration.
He was ignored.
The militarists on the council were too far gone at this point
to be shaken by the destruction of just one more city.
War Minister Anami, after hearing the news,
said, "...I am convinced that the Americans had only one bomb after all."
Even after the destruction of Hiroshima,
Anami and the other militarists remained committed to pursuing a negotiated peace.
Togo met with the Emperor the next day, on August 8th,
and they both agreed that the war was lost and they should surrender.
But even these two, who have both wanted peace for a long time now,
are still thinking at this point about the possibility of negotiating a peace.
Togo stated after the war that while he and the Emperor wanted to end the war,
quote, "...as soon as possible,"
they would not completely discard the possibility of negotiating conditions.
Armed with the Emperor's wish that the war should be ended,
Togo called a meeting of the Supreme Council for the direction of the war
to be held the next day, as some ministers were unavailable.
And I'd like to comment on two incredibly frustrating things here.
First is obviously that the Japanese leadership did not unanimously
and immediately unconditionally surrender.
The militarists were still conning themselves into thinking
they would get to force favorable terms by fighting against an Allied invasion.
The second incredibly frustrating thing is just how amazingly slowly this process is going.
Hiroshima was bombed on August 6th.
Togo's advice to surrender was ignored on August 7th.
He met with the Emperor to discuss what to do on August 8th,
and then called the Supreme Council meeting to discuss things further on August 9th,
because some ministers weren't available sooner.
What were they doing?
They had something more important to do, clearly.
Where were they?
If Truman and Burns had intended the bomb
to immediately shock the Japanese leadership out of the war,
they severely miscalculated.
The militarists heard of the destruction of Hiroshima, and they shrugged.
It was just one more bombed city.
They'd seen dozens of those already.
The Emperor and the less unwise members of the council desired peace as they had before,
but despite claims they wanted to end the war as quickly as possible,
they too were moving in slow motion.
There is an arrogant lack of urgency here.
The Emperor isn't ordering an end to the war here.
He's simply letting it be known, again, that he thinks ending the war is desirable,
and asking Togo to pass the message on to the Supreme Council
once they get back off their holidays or wherever it was they went.
More than a full day after the atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima,
Ambassador Sato in Moscow received the following message from Tokyo.
The situation is becoming more and more pressing,
and we would like to know at once the explicit attitude of the Russians.
So will you put forth still greater efforts to get a reply from them in haste?
Upon reading this, I picture Sato justifiably imagining himself
doing various types of violence to the members of the Supreme Council.
Sato wouldn't have to wait long to find out, as though he needed to,
the explicit attitude of the Russians.
Molotov summoned Sato to the Kremlin on August 8th
and handed him the Soviet Union's declaration of war against Japan,
and you rarely have to feel for the poor bastard at this point.
He warned them this was coming, and they didn't listen.
The Soviet army crossed the border into Japanese-occupied Manchuria
near midnight on the 8th of August and began smashing apart the Japanese defenses.
Because their leadership had refused to accept the inevitable reality of an imminent Russian invasion,
the underequipped Japanese troops were not prepared for or expecting a fight,
and they were quickly overwhelmed.
When the news of the Soviet declaration of war reached Tokyo,
Prime Minister Suzuki met with Cabinet Secretary Sakomizu,
and after discussing the news, came to the conclusion that their only two options
were either to declare war on the Soviet Union and fight to certain death,
or they could accept the terms of the Potsdam Declaration.
Suzuki met with the Emperor early in the morning on the 9th of August,
and the Emperor agreed to accept the terms of the Potsdam Declaration,
a meeting of the Supreme Council, was called.
The six members of the council met to discuss their upcoming surrender
and immediately deadlocked again.
I sound like a broken record here, I know,
but the moderate faction supported accepting the Potsdam Declaration
with the singular condition that the Imperial Institution be protected,
and the militarist faction supported accepting it only if they got to keep the Emperor,
do their own war crimes trials,
remain free of foreign occupation,
everyone gets a pony,
the army gets Fridays off now, etc.
Hours into this ridiculous conversation,
a messenger arrives to announce that Nagasaki had just been hit with a nuclear bomb.
Now, if anyone expects this news to have any impact whatsoever
upon the impasse in the Supreme Council,
I have done a very poor job of explaining what the Supreme Council is like.
The bombing of Nagasaki, of course, had no effect whatsoever.
The council remained deadlocked.
They spoke for hours.
They upgraded to a full government cabinet meeting with 16 members.
They spoke for hours again in that meeting.
No conclusion was reached, and they broke for dinner.
Now, I wouldn't blame anyone for considering this a very unlikely sequence of events.
How could they be hit with two nuclear bombs
and that still not be enough to break this deadlock?
And the answer to that is they, the Supreme Council,
haven't been hit with any nuclear bombs.
Some unimportant peasants somewhere have been hit with nuclear bombs.
The council are fine. They don't care.
This brings us back to one of the failures of morale bombing.
Totalitarian, militaristic regimes don't give a toss about their citizens.
You can't frighten them by killing poor people.
That's their day job.
At one or other of these council meetings prior to the end of the war,
Chief of the Army General Staff Umezu was asked about Japan's defense against atomic bombs,
and he replied,
So that's the militarist position on the bombs stated pretty clearly there.
They don't really care.
The nuclear bombs were no reason to surrender.
This impasse in the council did need to be broken somehow, though.
So Suzuki, Togo, and Sakomizu met in the Prime Minister's office
and hatched a plan to have the Emperor himself resolve the argument
with a sacred royal judgment, something which was highly unusual.
The Emperor was not supposed to get involved in affairs of state so directly.
To achieve this, they had to call an imperial conference.
So Suzuki went to the Emperor to request that one be called,
a request which was granted immediately, which is very shocking for this lot.
I'm surprised they didn't take a week off to think about it.
At this imperial conference, the members of the Supreme Council
immediately deadlocked along the same lines as all the previous meetings.
Their arguments were the same as before.
The militarists wanted to insist on attaching multiple conditions
to their offer to accept the Potsdam Declaration,
and the moderates wanted to attach only one, the preservation of the Emperor.
They talked until past 2 a.m. in the morning when Prime Minister Suzuki,
talking over the protests of War Minister Onami,
dared to ask the Emperor directly what he wanted to do.
The Emperor said he agreed with the moderates, and this intervention did the trick.
Japan would offer to accept the terms of the Potsdam Declaration,
with the understanding that said declaration does not comprise any demand
which prejudices the prerogatives of His Majesty as a sovereign ruler.
Truman and his advisors got the message that morning on the 10th of August,
and they gathered to discuss their response.
Admiral Leahy thought that the condition should be accepted.
He argued that the matter of the Emperor's position was a trivial one
compared to passing up an opportunity to bring an end to the war.
Secretary Stimson likewise thought the condition should be accepted,
and he also notes in his diary,
"...in my opinion, with a slightly sarcastic tone,
it is curious that this was the very single point that I figured would make trouble."
And then he talks about his earlier draft of the Potsdam Declaration,
which included an offer to retain the Imperial Institution,
the very thing that was now delaying the end of the war.
If Stimson managed not to say,
"...I told you so,"
then he's a more disciplined man than I.
In support of accepting the Japanese condition,
Stimson argued that the United States wanted to keep the Emperor anyway.
They needed to use his power to convince the Japanese military to stand down.
Stimson was also aware that time was a factor here.
The Soviet Army was on the march,
and he thought that the war with Japan needed to be ended quickly
before the Russians were able to reach the Japanese homeland.
James Burns, on the other hand, said,
"...no, we should not accept this condition.
I do not see why we should retreat from our demand for unconditional surrender," he said.
"...If any conditions are to be accepted,
I want the United States and not Japan to state the conditions."
That was his account of his words from his memoirs there.
So the conditions, to the unconditional surrender, work that out,
should be coming from us here.
They lost the war, why do they get to say the conditions?
We won, we say the conditions.
A justification for Burns' position is found in Stimson's diary,
where he writes that,
"...Burns was troubled and anxious to find out whether we could accept this
in light of some of the public statements by Roosevelt and Truman.
Of course, during three years of a bitter war,
there have been bitter statements made about the Emperor.
Now they come to plague us."
So according to Stimson, Burns is again worried here
about the public perception of backing away from unconditional surrender.
We've been calling the Emperor a monstrous dictator for the last three years,
and now we're gonna let him off the hook because he told us to?
That's not gonna play.
So Truman and his advisors came up with a compromise position.
They would send a note to Japan, written by Burns,
intending to imply, without stating it so directly,
that Japan would be allowed to keep the Emperor.
The note stated that,
"...the Emperor shall issue his commands to all the Japanese military,
naval, and air authorities,
and to all the forces under their control wherever located,
to cease active operations and to surrender their arms,
and to issue such other orders as the Supreme Commander may require
to give effect to the surrender terms."
So they're giving the Emperor a list of jobs, basically.
They're implying that he gets to stay around
by laying out what his role is going to be going forward.
And the note also states that,
"...the ultimate form of government of Japan shall,
in accordance with the Potsdam Declaration,
be established by the freely expressed will of the Japanese people."
Truman sums up the intended aim of the Burns note in his diary when he says,
"...they wanted to make a condition precedent to the surrender.
They wanted to keep the Emperor.
We told him we'd tell him how to keep him, but we'd make the terms."
So what's happened here is the United States said to Japan,
"...we demand you surrender unconditionally."
And Japan responded,
"...we will gladly accept unconditional surrender
on the condition that you first agree to this condition to that unconditional surrender."
To which the United States responded,
"...oh, we will happily agree to this condition to the unconditional surrender
on the condition that you agree that you're accepting the condition,
not that we are accepting the condition.
You're keeping the Emperor because we want that, not because you want that.
So there."
When the Japanese leadership received the Burns note,
well, we all know how this goes by now, don't we?
There was yet another stalemate.
They disagreed over its exact meaning.
There were arguments, plots, threats, proposed possible revisions to the note.
Prime Minister Suzuki swapped sides for a bit and then swapped back again.
None of this matters at all.
They're just wasting time not accomplishing anything.
After several days of this nonsense,
the Emperor intervened to break the stalemate... again.
On August 14th, the Emperor summoned his cabinet to an Imperial conference,
listened once more to the tedious arguments of the militarists,
and responded that he had not changed his mind and still wanted to end the war.
This second direct intervention finally mercifully brought about a surrender.
Japan would accept the terms of the Potsdam Declaration.
At 12 midday on August 15th,
the Emperor broadcast by public radio an address announcing that the war was over.
Now around this time, there was a coup attempt organized by some junior officers
in the Japanese military trying to prevent Japan's surrender,
but they failed to gain support of the military leadership and it quickly fizzled out.
War Minister Anami refused to support the coup,
choosing instead to go home and commit suicide.
And though the war with the other allies was over,
Stalin stepped up his offensive against the Japanese-occupied territories he wished to capture.
Surrender or no surrender, Stalin was going to take what he felt he was owed.
And Russia's annexing, for instance, of several of the Kuril Islands
led to a dispute over ownership that is still going on today,
with both Japan and Russia arguing over who has sovereignty of the islands,
when, really, it should be neither of them.
There were already people on those islands before either Russia or Japan turned up.
Other than that though, the Second World War was over.
Just about.
Now, with regards to our main topic today, we can ask a question.
What effect did the nuclear bombs have on Japan's decision to end the war?
Well, Japan needed three main things, I would argue, in order to end the war.
Firstly, they had to be in a hopeless military situation with no chance of winning the war
and be aware of that.
And this one we can tick off.
The Japanese leadership knew it had no chance to actually defeat the allies militarily.
They had known that for quite a while.
Their only hope for their military was to use whatever was left of it
to drag out the war with the hopes of securing better peace terms for themselves.
Secondly, Japan had to be in a hopeless diplomatic situation and be aware of that.
Now, ever since the Russians signed the secret pact to declare war on Japan at the Yalta Conference,
the Japanese government was in a hopeless diplomatic situation.
But for a long time, they didn't understand that they were.
They held out hope for Russian mediation all the way until the Soviet Union declared war on them.
Now, some of the actions of the Allies undoubtedly contributed to Japan
not understanding the position they were in,
principal among those probably being the Soviet Union's signature
being struck off the Potsdam Declaration.
But we also can't ignore the capacity for willful ignorance and self-deception
among the members of the Japanese leadership.
They should have known their situation was hopeless.
After the Soviet Union declared war on Japan, however,
the Japanese leadership finally understood this second point.
And I'd like to add something here.
The strategic bombing survey that I mentioned at the start of the video stated,
Japan would have surrendered even if the atomic bombs had not been dropped,
even if Russia had not entered the war,
and even if no invasion had been planned or contemplated.
Now, I don't actually agree with that on the Russia point, anyway.
I personally feel that if the Japanese leadership,
with regards to getting help from the Soviet Union,
thought there was any hope remaining whatsoever,
they probably never would have surrendered,
even if it meant their entire country was burned to the ground.
The Soviet Union declaring war on Japan was crucial,
in that it forced them to confront their hopeless diplomatic situation.
To return to our list of things Japan needed in order to end the war,
third is an assurance that the Imperial Institution would not be abolished.
This was the main problem the Japanese leadership had
with the Allied demand for unconditional surrender, of course.
And I'd argue that the question of the Emperor was the most important point on this list.
And that's both on a national level,
the Emperor being a very important figure in Japanese society,
but also on a personal level,
because it's the Emperor himself intervening to end the war.
So an assurance that the Emperor himself would not be executed as a result of doing that
would probably help to speed things along there.
People who defend the atomic bombings as being necessary
often point to the bluster of the Japanese militarists who were,
even after the bombings and the Russian declaration of war,
still promising to fight to the last,
with the desperate idea of somehow securing better terms for themselves.
But they didn't do that once the Emperor intervened.
And the Emperor intervened not to avoid more cities being destroyed.
Remember, dozens of cities had already been destroyed.
The Emperor intervened to protect the Imperial office.
In a post-war interview,
he explained one of his reasons for choosing to intervene as being that, quote,
"...if the enemy landed near Ise Bay,
both Ise and Atsuta shrines would immediately come under their control.
There would be no time to transfer the sacred regalia of the Imperial family,
and no hope of protecting them."
Now, you'd think that protecting the Imperial knick-knacks
would be an unmentionably minor concern when compared to the nuclear bombing raids,
but apparently not.
The Emperor took all this Emperor business very seriously,
as did the rest of the Japanese government.
The militarists on the Supreme Council might have wanted to hold out for better terms,
even if it meant fighting to the death,
but they were not prepared to contradict the will of the Emperor.
Admiral Leahy wrote in his memoirs that himself and Secretary Stimson,
in their combined staff meetings, were, quote,
"...certain that the Mikado..."
That's an antiquated term for the Emperor.
"...could stop the war with a royal word."
And this turned out to be accurate.
That is how the war was stopped on the Japanese end.
Now, I don't want to get too deep into speculation about alternate history timelines today,
but I think it's fairly obvious that President Truman and James Burns,
deleting the offer to retain the Imperial institution from the Potsdam Declaration,
almost certainly lengthened the war.
If the Emperor didn't intervene to bring about a surrender immediately
upon receiving peace terms that assured his position,
he almost certainly would have,
when that was coupled with a Soviet declaration of war.
Japan had only been holding out for Russian mediation
in the hopes of securing better peace terms.
After the Soviet declaration of war, that option was fully off the table.
So I'd say it's vastly more likely than not
that having in hand both a declaration of war from the Soviet Union
and surrender terms from the other Allies that assured the Imperial House would survive,
the Emperor would have ended the war right there,
regardless of whether Japan had been hit with nuclear bombs or not.
Henry Stimson later noted in his memoirs that,
"...it is possible, in light of the final surrender,
that a clearer and earlier exposition of American willingness to retain the Emperor
would have produced an earlier ending to the war."
And he concluded in 1948 that,
"...history might find that the United States,
by its delay in stating its position, had prolonged the war."
Now, it would be very simple to conclude at this point that,
with regards to the end of the war,
the question of the Emperor was everything,
and the nuclear bombs didn't do anything.
But is that really the case?
Let's pose a few questions.
Firstly, we can ask,
were the bombs necessary to defeat Japan militarily?
And the answer to that is obviously no.
The Japanese leadership were beaten,
and they knew they were beaten long before the bombs were dropped.
So, were the bombs necessary to defeat Japan
without needing to carry out a ground invasion of the four main Japanese islands?
Well, to start with, we've quoted multiple US military leaders today
who say that Japan was ready to surrender
without either an invasion or the bombs being necessary.
But can we really trust their judgment of the situation?
You see, those leaders had a couple of potential reasons
to downplay the effectiveness of the bomb.
The first of these is simply that
they didn't want to be put out of a job by this thing.
The worry there was that,
if the atomic bombs really are that effective,
then maybe we don't need such a large conventional military force anymore.
So, clear your desk.
And another reason, I imagine, was pride.
If it's you who's been fighting the war all this time,
backing Japan into a corner and bringing them to the verge of surrender,
you probably don't want the narrative afterwards to be
scientists save the day and end the war with their new bomb.
It kind of undercuts all the work you did prior to that.
So I can see the motive there for US military leaders at the time to say,
However, these ulterior motives do not mean that the military leaders
who spoke out against the bomb were necessarily lying or wrong.
We know from what we've talked about today
that the Japanese leadership was close to surrender,
and was, as President Truman wrote in his diary,
asking for peace.
Japan would have surrendered long before an invasion if,
for instance, they thought they could secure terms which were acceptable to them.
They didn't actually want to be invaded just for the sake of it,
they were holding out for an invasion in the hopes of avoiding an unconditional surrender.
So US military leaders who claimed the bombs were not necessary to end the war were correct,
even if they had an ulterior motive for saying so.
Instead of a motivation to lie,
they could just have easily have had a motivation to tell an uncomfortable truth.
So then, were the bombs necessary to force Japan
to offer to surrender on the Allied terms without any conditions?
And the answer to this is also no, because they didn't do that.
Even after two atomic bombs,
the Japanese leadership still only offered to surrender on the condition
that they were assured they could keep the Emperor.
And between that offer to surrender and their eventual actual surrender,
they didn't get hit with any more nuclear bombs.
All this being said, I do not think that the nuclear bombs
had absolutely no effect at all on Japan's decision to surrender.
It would be going much too far to make that claim, in my opinion.
I'd say there were two main effects that the bombs had upon the end of the war.
Firstly, the nuclear bomb probably indirectly shortened the war,
because its existence prompted Truman to try to finish the war without the Soviet Union,
which in turn prompted Stalin to speed up his plans to declare war on Japan,
and that declaration of war sped up the Emperor intervening in the Supreme Council
to bring about an offer to surrender, with their condition, of course.
The Soviet Union declared war on Japan on the 8th of August,
and it's likely that if they weren't racing to get in the war as quickly as possible,
they would have declared war later in August sometime,
the 15th is what Stalin told Truman at Potsdam.
So we can say that, all other things being equal,
the existence of the atomic bomb probably shortened the war by a week or so.
The other effect the nuclear bomb had on the end of the war is a rather interesting one.
And let's read a post-war quote from Cabinet Secretary Sakomizu talking about the bomb.
"...the chance had come to end the war.
It was not necessary to blame the military side, the manufacturing people, or anyone else,
just the atomic bomb.
It was a good excuse.
Someone said the atomic bomb was the kamikaze to save Japan."
So, the bomb provided the non-military Japanese leadership with an excuse to proclaim defeat
that didn't involve blaming, or shaming, their proud military.
It lessened the risk of a revolt of the armed forces,
and it was a way to end the war while salvaging some pride,
as well as casting those killed by the bombs not as civilian war victims, but as heroic martyrs.
The Emperor's radio announcement declaring the end of the war took a similar approach.
Moreover, the enemy has begun to employ a new and most cruel bomb,
the power of which to do damage is indeed incalculable,
taking the toll of many innocent lives.
Should we continue to fight, it would not only result in an ultimate collapse
and obliteration of the Japanese nation,
but also it would lead to the total extinction of human civilization.
So the bomb allowed the Japanese leadership to say,
hey, we weren't beaten in a fair fight here.
Our brave military was gearing up for a decisive last battle,
but those cowardly Americans, they were too scared to face us.
So they invented this terrible bomb and started dropping it on innocent civilians, those monsters.
So I suppose we have to be the adults in the room here
and agree to stand down before you lunatics go and blow up the whole planet in a nuclear war.
So instead of being beaten fairly here, we're sort of like heroes for giving up, right?
Does anyone buy that?
Now this is desperate spin from a government trying to salvage whatever pride it could.
Anyone who takes this at face value,
particularly the bit about the toll of many innocent lives,
is falling for imperial propaganda.
The Emperor and the Japanese leadership did not care about the innocent civilian casualties.
The Supreme Council's plan for their civilians was for them to die in a wave of suicide attacks,
fighting a vastly better equipped allied military.
So do not lie to me that they suddenly came over all sympathetic about their poor subjects.
The problem for the Japanese leadership was not that innocent civilians were being killed,
it's that innocent civilians were being killed in a manner that was not useful.
They didn't want them being blown up in nuclear explosions,
they wanted them rushing American machine guns armed with bamboo sticks.
If they actually gave a toss about their civilians,
they would have surrendered months before they did when it was obvious the war was lost.
Instead, they selfishly hung on, trying to save their own positions and reputations.
They didn't want to take responsibility for the enormous mistake they had made.
So the bomb provided to the Japanese government an excuse to end the war
that did not involve blaming anyone in particular.
It's not anyone's fault all this, it's not like we did anything wrong,
it's just that they've got nuclear bombs now, and there's no accounting for that.
So it's possible in this regard that the bombs also shortened the war
by providing a face-saving excuse for the Japanese leadership to call it quits.
Now, as for whether this was a decisive factor,
as in if the bombs didn't exist and the Japanese government had no similar excuse
they wouldn't have surrendered when they did, I honestly can't say.
However, I will note that both of these possible effects of the bombs,
those being speeding up the Soviet declaration of war
and providing a face-saving excuse to quit,
do not require the bombs to be dropped in the middle of cities.
And this is a very important point that often goes overlooked
in the debate about whether the bombs were necessary or not.
Because beyond whether the bombs were necessary,
we also need to ask whether or not it was necessary
to use the bombs in the manner in which they were used.
There are other ways to use nuclear bombs than to drop them on civilians, of course.
On that note, this person is Leo Szilard.
Szilard was a Hungarian physicist who, in 1933,
conceived the idea of a nuclear chain reaction.
Szilard once lived in Germany, but he left when Hitler became the chancellor.
In 1939, Szilard approached Albert Einstein
and asked him to put his name to a letter Szilard had written,
warning then-President Roosevelt about the possibility
of Nazi development of nuclear weapons.
The Einstein-Zilard letter prompted action by Roosevelt,
leading to the creation of the Manhattan Project,
which Szilard also worked on.
Now, Szilard and many other scientists working on the project
were motivated by fears of a nuclear Nazi Germany,
something which, thankfully, never came about.
Once it was clear the Nazis would be defeated, however,
several scientists began warning against the now unnecessary use of the nuclear bomb.
A document called the Frank Report was put together in 1945
and signed by several prominent physicists, including Szilard.
The Frank Report warned about the possibility of the bomb's use
triggering an international arms race
and strongly advised against an unannounced attack against Japan.
The scientists behind the Frank Report instead advised Truman that, quote,
"...a demonstration of the new weapon may best be made
before the eyes of representatives of all United Nations
on the desert or a barren island."
Now, allow me to lay my cards on the table here
and say that this is how I think things should have been handled.
A public announcement and demonstration of the bomb,
coupled with an explicit warning to Japan,
would have provided the peace faction in the Japanese government
with the exact same excuse to quit without blaming their military.
The Emperor could still have done his
we're pulling out of the war to save the world routine,
except without two cities full of civilians being destroyed.
If the nuclear bombs were influential in ending the war,
it was by their existence, not by their use.
In order to use them as an excuse to surrender,
the Japanese leadership just needed to know about them,
not actually be hit by them.
One argument against demonstrating the bomb publicly
was that they were worried it might not work.
Henry Stimson later wrote that,
nothing would have been more damaging to our effort to obtain surrender
than a warning or a demonstration followed by a dud,
which is a perfectly valid line of reasoning.
Until the Trinity test, when you know they work.
After that, there's no excuse.
And the infuriating thing about this
is that if this public demonstration and warning didn't work,
you could still then use them against Japan afterwards.
I mean, you shouldn't drop them on cities, regardless,
but you could do that.
Doing it this way around costs you nothing
and potentially spurs the lives of two cities full of civilians.
The United States absolutely should have went public with the bomb.
However, with regards to the Frank Report's suggestions,
Groves and Oppenheimer didn't appreciate this bunch of bleeding hearts
telling them what to do with their new toy.
Oppenheimer had previously written about the quote,
fallacy of regarding a controlled test
as the culmination of the work of this laboratory.
The laboratory is operating under a directive to produce weapons.
This directive has been and will be rigorously adhered to.
So they didn't put in all this time and effort
just to blow up an empty field somewhere for some diplomats and journalists.
They were making a weapon
and they were going to drop it on a city without warning.
The Frank Report was ignored.
Not to be deterred, Leo Szilard put together a petition
signed by 70 Manhattan Project scientists
warning Truman about the possibility of quote,
opening the door to an era of devastation on an unimaginable scale.
In attempting to get this petition to the president,
Szilard, on the 28th of May, met with James Burns,
who, I'm sure you can guess, was not very sympathetic to Szilard's view.
Szilard later stated,
Burns was concerned about Russia's post-war behavior.
Russian forces had moved into Hungary and Romania.
Burns thought it would be very difficult to persuade Russia
to withdraw its troops from these countries
and that Russia would be more manageable if impressed by American military might.
I shared Burns' concern about Russia's throwing its weight around in the post-war period,
but I was completely flabbergasted by the assumption
that rattling the bomb might make Russia more manageable.
Szilard's petition never did make it to Truman.
Now, this quote from Burns here about making the Russians more manageable,
along with other documents that came to light in the post-war period,
for instance, the target committee's desire for the bomb to be used
in a manner that would ensure international recognition,
and Truman's diary entries revealing that he knew of the emperor's desire for peace
prior to the bombs being used,
allowed certain people to construct an alternative historical narrative
to the accepted story of America using the bomb to avoid an invasion of Japan.
In this new telling, America, thinking ahead to the post-war period,
used the bomb primarily as an indirect diplomatic weapon against the Soviet Union,
rather than as a direct military weapon against the Empire of Japan.
Now, there is evidence to support that this motivation was certainly a factor.
It definitely was for Secretary of State James Burns, for instance,
but this evidence has led some to conclude that the bombs were dropped solely to intimidate Russia,
and this is going much too far, in my opinion.
Anyone who points to a singular reason as the explanation for why the bombs were dropped
is definitely oversimplifying the history.
The bombs were dropped for a combination of many reasons,
and let's list some of them.
So first, the bombs were dropped, in part, to limit Soviet influence in Asia
and make other diplomatic negotiations with the Soviet Union go smoother for the United States.
Although this turned out to be an enormous miscalculation,
it was assumed, incorrectly, that it would take the Soviets a lot longer
to develop their own nuclear weapons than it actually did,
and the United States would get to enjoy a long stretch of time as the world's only nuclear power.
Unbeknownst to Truman, however, Stalin had spies inside the Manhattan Project
who were sending plans and information back to Russia,
in just a few short years, the Soviet Union would be testing their own nuclear weapons,
and the feared arms race was on.
Next, the bombs were dropped, in part, to force an end to the war
without the United States being seen to back down from unconditional surrender.
It was more preferable to certain people
that the United States set off nuclear bombs in the middle of cities
than the president take a knock to his popularity by looking hypocritical or weak.
Another possible reason the bombs were dropped was to justify their expense.
Admiral Leahy argues in his memoirs that,
"...it was my reaction that the scientists and others wanted to make this test
because of the vast sums that had been spent on the project.
Truman knew that and so did other people involved."
The Manhattan Project was enormously expensive
and diverted many of the United States' top scientists and engineers away from other useful work.
It was very costly in terms of dollars, materials, and manpower,
and the project's management wanted something to show for the expense.
They didn't want the culmination of their work to simply be blowing up a field somewhere.
Another motivation, surely, was revenge.
The White House press release announcing the use of the bomb at Hiroshima stated,
"...the Japanese began the war from the air at Pearl Harbor.
They have been repaid many fold."
So this thinking is that the Japanese began the war with a sneak attack.
They carried out many war crimes and atrocities.
They mistreated prisoners of war.
And even though they began the war and lost it,
they still arrogantly refused to surrender
and dared to try and impose their own surrender terms on the Allied forces that had beaten them.
So yeah, we bombed them, but they were asking for it.
This motivation would be a lot more sympathetic and understandable
had the bombs not been dropped on civilians.
Because counter to what the White House press release said,
the Japanese did not begin the war at Pearl Harbor.
The Japanese leadership and military did that.
The Japanese civilians were not consulted.
If the United States wanted to use the bombs to pay back Pearl Harbor,
they should have dropped one on a military target.
Or the Supreme Council, I suppose.
Related to that last point,
another motivation that influenced the use of the bombs was just basic, regular racism.
It is very worth remembering that the racist ideas that inspired Nazi Germany
to commit such terrible atrocities were not limited to that country's borders.
When we've been talking about America today,
it was an America decades prior to the signing of the Civil Rights Act.
James Burns, a very influential figure in the events we've been talking about,
was a supporter of racial segregation.
And President Truman himself referred to the Japanese people as beasts several times.
And once, when defending the use of the bombs specifically,
he wrote that,
This is also undoubtedly one of the reasons that Japan,
and not Nazi Germany, was targeted with the nuclear bombs.
It was much easier for the people behind the bomb
to justify the use of such a destructive weapon
if it wasn't going to be used to kill white people.
And now, hold up a second,
scroll back up, everyone who just scrolled down,
to type in the comment box that
of course the bombs were used against Japan and not Nazi Germany.
Nazi Germany surrendered before the bombs were ready to be used.
Now, I know that, obviously,
but I didn't say used.
I said targeted.
And Japan was chosen as the target for the nuclear bombs
two years before Nazi Germany's surrender.
Japan was chosen as the target way back in 1943.
And when General Leslie Groves briefed President Truman
about the project in April 1945, he stated,
Another factor behind the use of the bombs
was simply the momentum of the project.
At the top of the United States leadership,
there was a vacuum of responsibility.
With Roosevelt's death and the newly installed President Truman
only just learning about the project near to its completion,
there's a sense that things were simply too far along to be halted,
without very firm leadership, anyway.
Truman's job was not to get in the bomb's way.
Leslie Groves described Truman's role in the atomic bombings as,
He was a rubber stamp for the project, basically.
Truman simply assumed the bomb would be used when ready.
He didn't even give a specific order for the first two bombs to be dropped.
And after the first two bombs, it was ordered that no more would be dropped
without his explicit permission to do so.
Which of course implies that they didn't need that permission beforehand.
We can see something of an abdication of responsibility
among those behind the nuclear bomb.
In his memoirs, Truman states,
I had realized, of course, that the atomic bomb explosion
would inflict damage and casualties beyond imagination.
On the other hand, the scientific advisors of the committee reported,
We can propose no technical demonstration likely to bring an end to the war.
We see no acceptable alternative to direct military use.
It was their conclusion that no technical demonstration they might propose,
such as over a deserted island, would be likely to bring the war to an end.
It had to be used against an enemy target.
On the other hand, several top Manhattan Project scientists, including Oppenheimer,
made efforts to distance themselves from what they claimed was merely a military decision.
In a report issued on the 16th of June, they stated that,
We have no claim to special competence in solving the political, social, and military problems
which are presented by the advent of atomic power.
Oppenheimer also later stated that,
We didn't know beans about the military situation in Japan.
We didn't know whether they could be caused to surrender by other means,
or whether the invasion was really inevitable.
So Truman's sharing responsibility with the scientists here, saying,
Well, I knew the bomb was gonna be horrible, obviously,
but the scientists told me a peaceful demonstration would never work,
and that I had to drop it on a city, so, you know.
And the scientists are saying,
Hey, well, what are you listening to us for? We don't know.
We're physicists. We just built the thing.
We don't know about foreign policy or military strategy.
There's a sense that nobody's really in control of this thing.
The ball was rolling, and nobody had the inclination to stop it.
I would like to add, however, that regardless of any of this,
Truman is still responsible here, and he still made a decision,
even if it was more of a passive decision than an active one.
Now, all this has led some to wonder about whether or not the bombs would have been used
had President Roosevelt not died when he did.
Albert Einstein, who I'm told was a rather smart guy in certain regards,
came to this conclusion, stating that,
The use of the atomic bombs was precipitated by a desire to end the war in the Pacific
by any means before Russia's participation.
I'm sure if President Roosevelt had still been there,
none of that would have been possible.
So as we've seen, the bombs were dropped for a combination of many reasons,
but none of these was to avoid an invasion of Japan.
By the time it was an option to drop nuclear bombs on Japan,
an invasion was already off the table.
It was no longer necessary.
Both Truman and Burns thought that Japan was going to surrender
because of the upcoming Russian declaration of war,
and the bombs were dropped, in part, to attempt to force a surrender prior to that.
Before we wrap up today, we should ask,
Where did this invasion narrative come from?
Why is it the enduring popular perception of events?
Let's return to the start of the video,
and talk again about what I called the trolley problem version of events.
Now, I have a confession to make about this.
What I do when I want to find an example of a poor argument put forward ineptly,
is go and check if Prager University has ever made a video on the topic.
And would you know it, they have made one about the nuclear bombs,
titled, Was it wrong to drop the atom bomb on Japan?
Which, of course, concludes it was completely justified.
And the version of events written at the start of my video
is constructed almost entirely out of statements made in their video.
So, that's right, this was a stealth PragerU response video this whole time.
What a twist.
So this PragerU video starts out by giving far too much agency
to a certain Mr. President Truman, when they say,
Truman sought to bomb Hiroshima and Nagasaki,
two major military industrial targets, to avoid an invasion of Japan.
So they're assigning to Truman the decision of which targets to bomb there.
Now, Truman had no input on deciding to target Hiroshima or Nagasaki,
he didn't even know Nagasaki was going to be bombed until after it already had been.
Nagasaki wasn't even the target city of the plane that dropped the bomb on Nagasaki,
it only got attacked because the primary targets was too cloudy to hit.
Now, I could pick through this video line by line,
giving rebuttals like this to each of its claims,
but this video is long enough already,
so instead I just want to focus on two quotes
that concern the bombs versus invasion narrative.
And the first is this,
it was only the dropping of the atom bombs that allowed the emperor
and the so-called peace faction in the Japanese government
to negotiate an end to the war.
Now, this is just a total inversion of reality.
The atom bombs did not allow the emperor to negotiate an end to the war,
either with the United States or within his own government.
The problem was not that, prior to the bombs,
Japan was refusing to negotiate an end to the war,
it's that they were insisting on negotiating an end to the war.
The United States was the country refusing to negotiate an end to the war
because they were insisting on unconditional surrender.
And the emperor didn't negotiate an end to the war within his own government,
he was the emperor.
The government did what he said.
The militarists wanted to fight to the death even after the nuclear bombs were dropped.
There was no negotiation, there was no convincing them,
it was a deadlock broken by the emperor's divine ruling.
This idea that the Japanese leadership were committed to total war
only until the bombs forced them to the negotiating table is entirely false.
I also have a particular distaste for the phrasing
it was only the dropping of the atom bomb
because Imperial Japan was beaten long before the nuclear bombs were dropped
and pretending that it took the nuclear bombs to defeat Japan is not only untrue,
it's a dangerous exaggeration.
It makes the Empire of Japan into such a powerful enemy
that you need nuclear force to take them down
and it covers up the reality,
which is that Imperial Japan was already a defeated state
run by incompetent, ignorant leaders.
The next quote I want to talk about is this.
All the viable alternate scenarios to secure American victory,
all would have meant significantly greater American and Allied casualties
and much higher Japanese civilian and military casualties.
According to American military estimates at the time,
those numbers would have been well above one million.
Now, you may have noticed today that we have not thus far
discussed what the projected wartime casualties
of a full Allied invasion of Japan were going to be.
And that's because until after the war, there were no such projections made.
This quote from PragerU here is a lie.
The enormously high death estimates for a full invasion of Japan
were entirely a post-war fabrication.
Now, before we talk about where this one million figure came from,
I'd like to remind everyone that an invasion was unnecessary
and not going to happen anyway.
Whatever death estimates you come up with,
a thousand, a million, a hundred million,
it does not matter.
An invasion was not going to happen
and the bombs were not used to avert it.
Right, so with that in mind,
this one million figure comes from an article published
in Henry Stimson's name in Harper's Magazine in 1947.
This article was written in response to various criticisms
of the use of the atomic bomb,
which had begun emerging after the end of the war,
and it was edited by various people responsible for the bomb,
including General Leslie Groves.
The article lays out the trolley problem excuse.
We simply had to do the nuclear bombs, it argues.
There was no other way.
Talking about the apparently inevitable invasion,
the article states,
"...I was informed that such operations might be expected
to cost over a million casualties to American forces alone."
Now, as I've already stated,
there is no evidence of such an estimate being made
prior to the end of the war,
and President Truman at no point presented the nuclear bombs
as an alternative to an Allied invasion of Japan
until he had to justify the use of the bombs after the war.
Only then did the invasion become inevitable,
and did the death estimates shoot up into the millions.
This is where the atom bombs versus invasion narrative comes from.
After the bomb was dropped,
the US leadership started telling lies about it.
President Truman himself got started very early on August 9th, 1945,
when he addressed the nation with a speech
seeking to justify the use of the nuclear bomb,
and I quote,
"...the world will note that the first atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima,
a military base.
That was because we wished in this first attack to avoid,
insofar as possible, the killing of civilians."
Now, this is a lie, obviously.
Hiroshima was a city.
The bomb's target committee describes it as a city.
Remember that Hiroshima has the advantage of being such a size
that a large fraction of the city may be destroyed.
And Truman's lying continues as follows,
"...but that attack is only a warning of things to come.
If Japan does not surrender,
bombs will have to be dropped on her war industries,
and unfortunately, thousands of civilian lives will be lost.
I urge Japanese civilians to leave industrial cities immediately,
and save themselves from destruction."
So Truman isn't justifying the bombing of Hiroshima by saying
it was a city with several war industries in it,
which is what the eventual excuse came to be.
He's going for broke here and saying it was solely a military base,
and that unless Japan surrenders,
bombs will have to be dropped on her war industries,
implying that that has not happened already.
Averting an invasion was not given as a reason for using the bombs in this speech,
because they hadn't come up with that excuse yet.
Truman also here claims the bomb was used to spare the lives of thousands and thousands,
not the later claimed millions and millions.
Another lie that became popular after the war
was that the nuclear bomb was dropped in response to Japan ignoring the Potsdam Declaration.
However, the only existing direct order to go ahead
with the use of the nuclear bombs against Japan
was issued prior to the Potsdam Declaration.
Not by Truman, of course, he didn't have anything to do with it.
It was drafted by Leslie Groves, approved by Henry Stimson,
and delivered to General Karl Spatz,
commander of the Strategic Air Forces, on July the 25th,
the day before the Potsdam Declaration was issued.
They did not wait for a response
before issuing the order to proceed with the atomic bombings.
The order was issued before Japan had even seen the surrender terms.
As a result of these lies and others,
the simplified version of the history came into existence.
And it isn't hard to understand why this caught on.
Firstly, it took me two minutes at the top of the video to explain the easy lie,
and the whole rest of the video to explain the much more complicated truth.
The bombs versus invasion narrative is simple, it's plausible, and it's easy to understand.
It isn't true, of course, but why let that get in the way of a good story?
But the invasion narrative is not just easier to understand,
it's also easier to accept.
Because if we question it, we have to contend with the possibility, or the certainty,
that the United States of America
incinerated two cities full of innocent civilians for no good reason.
Given the enormous death toll,
the truth, that the use of the bombs was pointless and accomplished nothing,
is very difficult to accept.
Now, it's about time for me to conclude this video here.
And trying to neatly sum up such a complicated event
with so many actors all with their own contradictory motivations
is surely an exercise in frustration.
There is no doing it justice.
That said, the nuclear bombs used against Japan
were an expensive gamble that did not pay off.
They were dropped on civilians, intentionally,
per the flawed strategy of morale bombing,
to force Japan to surrender unconditionally
before the Soviet Union joined the war.
In this, they were a complete failure.
The lie that the bombs were used only to avert an invasion of Japan
was a post-war construction,
intended to provide justification for a completely avoidable
and indefensible slaughter of innocent civilians.
The civilians who died in Hiroshima and Nagasaki
were not killed to avert an invasion of Japan,
nor did they bravely give their lives in sacrifice to save their empire.
Their deaths were entirely unnecessary,
and we owe it to them to admit that.
Often, when terrible injustices
towards the inhabitants of one country are discussed,
the response will come,
well, what about all the terrible injustices
carried out by that country to other people?
This is a question that has varying motivations behind it
of varying legitimacy.
On the one hand, certain events from the Second World War,
and wider history in general, I suppose,
do get much more attention and discussion,
for whatever reasons,
than other events of equal importance.
And it is perfectly valid to ask that we do not forget
that Imperial Japan committed many terrible war crimes
and was, both during and before the war,
a brutal totalitarian oppressor of many different people.
I think it's very important to make clear here
that nothing we've talked about today
should generate any sympathy whatsoever
for Imperial Japan as a concept
or the leadership of the Imperial Japanese government or military.
The crimes of the Empire of Japan were dreadful,
and there is no punishment that perpetrators would not deserve.
And many of these crimes, it is worth pointing out,
have went either ignored or unapologized for
by the Japanese government to this day.
All that being said,
we must be careful to accurately allocate fault here.
Because unfortunately, that same question,
what about all the stuff they did,
is not always asked with such innocent intentions.
Sometimes this question reveals something very worrisome,
and that's the belief in racial crimes
that can be avenged with violence
towards other members of that group.
And this is the worst sort of us versus them thinking.
They did something bad to us, so they,
and by they I mean anyone I reckon is in that group,
deserves something bad in return.
So while we should have no sympathy whatsoever
for the Empire of Japan,
the schoolchildren of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
were not the Empire of Japan.
They were some schoolchildren.
They had nothing to do with Pearl Harbor.
They did not consent to go to war.
They were needlessly put in danger by one power,
and needlessly killed by another.
Nothing was avenged or paid back.
There was no point to it,
but to provide yet more evidence
that there's no monopoly held by any nation or race
on a disregard for the lives of the powerless.
Thanks a lot for watching, everyone.
If you enjoyed this video,
please consider clicking the subscribe button
so you'll be informed of future videos,
which hopefully won't all be this long
and take quite so long to come out.
And thank you in particular to my wonderful supporters
over on Patreon for supporting me
while I make videos like this one
and providing very useful feedback.
I'm currently accepting suggestions
for future video topics on my Patreon page,
so if you have anything in particular
you would like to suggest,
you can head over to the Patreon link
in the video description and let me know.
Right. Thanks a lot, folks.
I'll see you next time.
