In an interview with Ben Stein for the movie Expelled, he stated quite clearly that no
one knows how life started and that there's a real possibility that life on this planet
may have been seeded or influenced by higher forms of life.
Here's a question.
Why doesn't the what you ought to know guy actually show Dawkins saying that instead
of just telling us he said it?
After all, the clip is freely available.
Well, you've probably guessed, because Dawkins never said it.
So I will show the clip, but before I do, take a look at the transcript.
Now read carefully and I hope you'll notice something odd.
Ben Stein asks how heaven and earth got created.
Dawkins says, quite rightly, that this was a very slow process.
So Stein asks how it got started.
Now here Dawkins could have explained about the Big Bang and the condensation of matter
from a plasma of energy and the coming together of quantum particles to form atoms and how
space expanded and these atoms were drawn together to form the first stars.
But instead he says nobody knows how life started.
Now why would Dawkins say that when the start of our universe has been understood since
the 1950s?
Then Dawkins' explanation gets even stranger.
He says we know the sort of event that must have happened for the origin of life.
The origin of life?
But the origin of life has nothing to do with the origin of the universe.
The two events are separated by about 10 billion years.
Has Dawkins gone mad or did I miss something?
Well it turns out I did miss something and when we look at the interview itself we can
see where it's gone missing.
Well then how did it get created?
Well um by a very slow process.
Well how did it start?
Nobody knows how it got started.
We know the kind of event that it must have been.
We know the sort of event that must have happened for the origin of life.
Four very obvious cuts in both the audio and the video in the space of just a few seconds
taking us from a question about the origin of the universe to an answer about the origin
of life.
If you saw my video on TV tricks of the trade, and even if you didn't, it's not hard to spot
the very clumsy edits here.
Right, how did that happen?
I told you we don't know.
Dawkins could be answering no one knows to just about anything because we don't get to
hear what the question was.
The giveaway is so clear that this kind of duplicitous editing wouldn't fool anyone.
Oh okay, most people.
But that's hardly enough to earn a golden crocoduck, so let's look at what does.
There's a real possibility that life on this planet may have been seeded or influenced
by higher forms of life.
Yes, this is the second thing Dawkins was supposed to have stated.
Now Dawkins has already said that life must have started with a self-replicating molecule.
We know the sort of event that must have happened for the origin of life.
What was that?
It was the origin of the first self-replicating molecule.
So isn't it odd that he suddenly starts talking about the possibility that we were designed
by aliens from another planet?
Are we missing something?
Once again, yes.
So you have no idea how it started?
No, no.
Nor has anybody.
Nor has anyone else.
What do you think is the possibility that intelligent design might turn out to be the
answer to some issues in genetics or in evolution?
It could come about in the following way.
It could be that at some earlier time, somewhere in the universe, a civilization evolved.
And once again, the question doesn't fit the answer.
What do you think of the possibility of intelligent design?
Should elicit the answer.
Well, anything's possible, but it's very unlikely.
So if Dawkins's answer is, it could come about in the following way, then the question must
have been different.
I was going to suggest that Stein's question must have been something like, if there was
intelligent design, how might it have come about?
But then I came across this interview with Dawkins in which he told us the question that
was put to him.
So when Ben Stein, who was the compare of the infamous, expelled film that some of you
may have heard of, asked me in an interview whether I could think of any circumstances
in which I could remotely think that intelligent design of life on Earth was plausible.
And of course that fits perfectly with his answer.
Now, does it matter how he was led into this question?
After all, he did say it was a possibility.
Yes, but the conditions that he was given, that he had to come up with some way that
intelligent design might have happened, have been cut.
After all, I could ask Ben Stein if it's possible Richard Nixon was gay.
And if he's honest, he would have to say yes, of course it's possible.
Pat could have been a cover, but would it then be fair to write this headline?
Stein claims possible Nixon was gay.
And if all Stein did was admit to the possibility if all other options are taken away, then
it would be even more of a distortion to write, Stein claims real possibility Nixon was gay.
And finally, Stein claims Nixon was gay.
And that's where this misquote of Dawkins takes us.
From a hypothetical possibility if the option of abiogenesis is taken away, to a possibility
that it happened, to a real possibility that it happened.
There's a real possibility that life on this planet may have been seeded or influenced
by higher forms of life.
And then to Dawkins saying it actually happened.
It's wonderful what you can do with these one-off quotes and a complete disregard for
the truth, simply to score a few silly brownie points in support of your religion.
Potholer needs to be filled in on thermodynamics.
I promise this wasn't nominated by me, but Ian Juby refers to me in this video.
And this begs exactly the same question I put to the previous nominee, why is it that
Ian doesn't show a clip from my video where I cite snowflakes and sunflowers as examples
of how energy from the sun causes life to arise on earth?
He tells people I said this, so why not actually show me saying it?
Well, the answer is, of course, because there are no clips of me saying that.
Ironically, in trying to criticise a video called Setting Fire to Creationist Strawmen,
Juby has set up his own creationist strawman.
In his a bit of advice, in my videos I always play the clip or show the quote I'm critiquing
so that there can be no question that I've misinterpreted or misquoted it, or simply
made it up out of thin air.
So here's what I actually said about sunflowers and snowflakes in response to a nominee called
the atheist antidote.
He claimed the second law of thermodynamics supports creationism because it says the whole
universe is running down into complete disorder.
Now I say quite explicitly that I was using the example of snowflakes and sunflowers and
geodes to show that there is a tendency for the universe to run down into disorder.
No one, apart from creationists, has ever defined the second law as the whole universe
running down into complete disorder.
After all, we only need to look around us to see that that isn't the case.
Plant a sunflower seed and it grows into a flower that can turn to face the sun.
When water evaporates and rises haphazardly into the atmosphere, it turns into exquisitely
ordered snowflakes.
As long as the snowflake eventually melts, the sunflower dies and the geode eventually
gets remelted, then every example of order is in perfect conformity with the second
law.
Obviously, Ian couldn't find anything wrong with that statement, so he made something
up.
It's not true, but that's why we have the golden crocoduck.
Once again, Juby doesn't show a clip of me comparing a snowflake to a sunflower, because
as you've just seen, he doesn't have one.
From this he seems to go completely off the rails, like saying that because a rock formed
by natural processes, we can therefore conclude that the space shuttle can also form by natural
processes.
Yeah, good point Ian.
And so here's Juby's conclusion, and apparently he still thinks he's arguing with something
I said.
Well yes, Ian, that's exactly what I spent five minutes explaining, in a clip that you
could quite easily have shown people if you wanted to rebut what I was saying.
In fact, reality complies very nicely with the second law of thermodynamics, which says
there's a tendency towards disorder in a closed system.
And evolution complies very nicely also, on two counts.
First, there is a tendency towards disorder in a closed system.
I know, it's definitely more trouble and more time consuming to download the videos
you're critiquing and find the clips you want to rebut.
But at least my subscribers know that they're not being thrown a straw man because I always
show them what someone actually says, rather than make up some spurious claim about what
they said.
And if you do that, you're less likely to slip up and get nominated for a golden crocoduck.
