Now here's an interesting thing I read in the blog, Louder with Crowder.
You know how pompous people with their Nissan leaves and...
It tells me I apparently know that electric cars are driven by pompous people
with a sense of entitlement, who believe they're saving the planet
and think they're better than me because they care more.
Do I know that?
Uh-huh. Show them this.
This turns out to be a video which Louder with Crowder assures us...
...using things like science, facts and math...
...and it comes from a university.
Well, that sounds like a reliable source...
The great people at Prager University have shown, with illustrations,
the people who drive electric cars and think they're saving the planet
are in fact borderline functionally retarded.
Okay, just a reminder, Prager University is not a university,
it's a YouTube channel just like mine.
So like my channel, you have to check where its information comes from,
however good its illustrations.
I was going to include this in part two of my series,
A Conservative Solution to Climate Change.
But pulling the PragerU video apart was such a fascinating journey
that I'm posting it separately.
You'll have to wait a bit longer for part two.
Like most Prager University courses, as they're called,
this is basically just a five-minute video presented here by Bjorn Lomborg.
Do electric cars really help the environment?
President Obama thinks so.
So does Leonardo DiCaprio, and many others.
But since the physics of car emissions is a scientific issue,
not a political or a thespian one,
isn't the more important point that scientists think so.
The energy efficiency of cars is not based on the beliefs of left-wing actors and politicians,
but meticulous scientific studies.
So instead of watching the unequal fight of Lomborg taking on Obama and DiCaprio,
let's put him in the ring with some actual scientific research
and see how his claims stand up to scrutiny.
First, there's the energy needed to produce the car.
More than a third of the lifetime carbon dioxide emissions from an electric car
comes from the energy used to make the car itself.
This is true.
Making an electric car uses more energy than making a gasoline-powered car,
mainly because the making of a battery is very energy-intensive.
So researchers look at the lifetime carbon footprint of an electric car,
including production, driving usage, and scrapping.
Around one third of the carbon footprint, sometimes more,
can be taken up in just making the vehicle, as Lomborg rightly points out.
What Lomborg doesn't tell us is how that compares to the production of a gasoline-powered car.
So let's take a look.
Turns out that only one tenth of the gasoline car's carbon footprint comes from production,
which sounds good.
So why doesn't Lomborg mention it?
Well, because the reason for the smaller ratio
is that gasoline cars use a huge amount of energy just being driven around.
So despite the smaller amount of energy used in manufacture,
gasoline cars have a much higher overall carbon footprint than electric cars.
Diesel cars are much more fuel-efficient,
but even that doesn't bring their overall carbon footprint below electric cars.
While it's true that electric cars don't run on gasoline, they do run on electricity,
which in the US is often produced by another fossil fuel, coal.
As green venture capitalist Vinod Khosla likes to point out, electric cars are coal-powered cars.
That would be true if all the electricity they use comes from coal, but of course it doesn't.
In the United States, some grids have a high coal component, others have none at all.
And for the national average, coal fuels less than a third of America's electricity.
The most popular electric car, the Nissan Leaf,
over a 90,000 mile lifetime will emit 31 metric tonnes of CO2.
A comparable Mercedes CDI A160 over a similar lifetime will emit just three
tonnes more across its production, diesel consumption and ultimate scrapping.
That's close to a 10% difference, which is not much.
So, as always, we have to ask, where do Lomborg's figures come from?
PragerU doesn't tell us.
Unlike my channel, where all my sources are cited, you rarely find citations at PragerU,
just a lot of advertising for their social media sites.
I don't know why they don't want to tell you where their information comes from,
but it means you can't check and verify it.
So I emailed Lomborg to ask him.
His office told me his source is this paper by Hawkins et al,
and right up top the abstract shows not a 10% difference, as Lomborg says,
but a range from 10% to 24%.
The authors later issued a corrigendum, and that figure was corrected to between 17% and 30%,
which is even further from Lomborg's claim.
The first thing that comes to mind is that Lomborg cherry-picked the figures,
but I can't say that without reading the study.
Okay, I've read the study, and yep, he cherry-picked the figures.
First of all, Lomborg has adjusted the figures to take account of America's greater reliance
on coal as a fuel for electricity, compared to the average European fuel mix
on which the study was based.
That's fair enough.
What he didn't do was adjust the fuel efficiency of the European cars
to take account of the lower fuel efficiency in the USA,
which would have made the electric cars look greener.
And here's where the cherry-picking comes in.
Turns out that when the paper looked at the crucial area of fuel consumption,
it didn't just make one comparison with the electric car, it made two.
One for diesel, the other for gasoline.
But the gasoline car miraculously disappears when Lomborg does his own calculations.
Why?
Presumably because even in fuel-efficient Europe, diesel cars have much better fuel economy,
in this case around 53 miles to the gallon combined city and highway driving,
and therefore emit far fewer lifetime CO2 emissions.
I did email Lomborg's office again asking why he had ignored the comparison
with the gasoline car, and I was stunned by this reply from his media manager.
I'm sure many drivers of different cars would want whatever vehicle they drive
to be included in an analysis.
However, comparison of one fossil fuel and one electric car
is the simplest and clearest way of highlighting their differences.
Anyone who understands basic science or data analysis must be face-palming right now.
Yes, I'm sure drivers of different cars would want whatever vehicle they drive
to be included in the analysis, but we're not dealing with drivers of different cars
or what they want.
We're dealing with a scientific study that made two comparisons.
Lomborg picked the one that came closest to supporting his conclusion
and ignored the one that didn't.
This is the lamest excuse for cherry-picking I've ever read.
If you don't understand how wrong that is, it would be like me claiming that
65% of US electricity comes from renewable resources, citing this study as my source.
I'm sure Lomborg would be the first to say this is an absurd claim
and accuse me of cherry-picking just one grid and ignoring the rest.
Would it be a legitimate excuse to say,
I'm sure many people would want whatever grid they're connected to included in an analysis,
but it's simpler and clearer to use just one.
Cherry-picking just one comparison may be simple,
but that makes it very unclear that the other comparison in the study
is screaming a very different result.
If it is simpler and clearer to choose just one,
the obvious choice would have been the gasoline car.
After all, only around 5% of Americans drive diesel cars,
and even though the gasoline car gets 42 miles to the gallon combined,
which is way more than most similar-sized American cars,
at least it's closer than the diesel's 53 miles to the gallon combined.
Better yet, adjust the fuel economy to an average of what most Americans drive.
I checked the EPA's annual fuel economy list for new small and hatchback cars,
and most gasoline vehicles in the USA are around or under 30 miles to the gallon combined,
so they're emitting around twice as much CO2 as the diesel comparison that Lomborg cherry-picked.
Then he goes on to make another comparison for larger cars, and again picks a diesel.
The results are similar for a top-line Tesla, the king of electric cars.
It emits about 44 tons, which is only five tons less than a similar Audi A7 Quattro.
That's a difference of about 10%.
PragerU cites no source, but USA Today gives us a link in Lomborg's opinion piece
where the same claim is made, and this was confirmed by Lomborg's office as his source.
But the links just take you to this government website,
listing the fuel economies of the two cars.
So let's see what actual published studies have found.
The Union of Concerned Scientists made a cradle-to-grave emissions study in the USA.
It found that gasoline cars emit 29 tons more CO2 equivalents than mid-size electric cars,
powered by an electricity grid mix representative of where those cars are sold,
and 54 tons for large cars.
That's 51% and 53% lower, respectively.
It's important to point out that where the cars are sold is not the same as the grid average,
and it brings me back to that all-important point.
The carbon footprint of electric cars depends on the fuel mix of the grid where they're charged,
and the fuel mix of the grid where the batteries are made.
The UCS study shows that different US grids have markedly different fuel mixes.
Even where a grid has a high component of coal-fueled electricity,
the car can still have a low carbon footprint by being produced and charged off-grid.
Tesla, for example, is building huge battery manufacturing plants in Nevada and China,
powered by solar energy.
As for charging off-grid, the UCS study cited a 2013 survey showing that 32% of respondents
who bought electric cars had solar panels on their roofs, and 16% intended to install them.
Another factor is urban versus highway driving.
The gap between gasoline and electric is much larger in cities, for various reasons.
For one thing, gasoline cars use a lot of energy just idling in traffic.
Another cradle-to-grave study done in France found that a small electric car emits 63%
less carbon dioxide than a gasoline car, from production to scrapping,
and 70% if the cars are recycled.
For a larger electric car compared to a larger diesel car, the difference is 44% to 57%.
That's a saving of between 21 and 20 tons of carbon dioxide.
But again, the study's results reflect the mix of fuels used.
In France, most electrical energy is nuclear-powered,
so electric cars there are much greener than they would be in Estonia, which is mostly coal-powered.
But remember Vinod Khosla's observation. Electric cars are coal-powered cars.
But we've already established that this observation is not an observation. It's a fallacy.
Yes, it might be powered by coal, proponents will say.
No, proponents of electric cars would not say that if they'd read any of the studies.
They'd say that most electric cars are partially powered by coal.
And they'd point out that many aren't powered by coal at all.
But unlike the regular car, coal plant emissions are far away from city centers,
where most people live, and where damage from air pollution is greatest.
New research in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
found that while gasoline cars pollute closer to home,
coal firepower actually pollutes more. A lot more.
How much more? Well, the researchers estimate that if the U.S. has 10% more gasoline cars in 2020,
870 more people will die each year from the additional air pollution.
If the U.S. has 10% more electric vehicles powered on the average U.S. electricity mix,
1617 more people will die every year from the extra pollution.
Matching the figures Lomborg uses with the name of the journal he gives,
I think he's talking about this 2014 paper by Tessam et al.
If so, he's absolutely right. That's what the paper found.
But that's still not the whole story, because if burning more coal leads to more deaths,
then surely burning less coal would lead to fewer deaths, wouldn't it?
And the Tessam study found exactly that. The red circle in the middle shows the number of deaths
from a 10% increase in electric cars if that electricity is sourced by the average U.S.
fuel mix, compared to gasoline, circled in red at the top.
As Lomborg correctly reports, that's 1617 more deaths.
But the researchers also concluded that if natural gas was the source of that electricity,
shown by the red circle near the bottom, there'd be less than 500 extra deaths.
That's far fewer than the 870 deaths from gasoline-driven cars.
Better yet, the authors found that if electric cars sourced their energy from renewables,
wind, water, and solar, the number of deaths would be cut even further,
to less than 200. Most of that coming from emissions during production.
So if we're worried about deaths caused by coal-burning power stations,
the obvious solution is to replace them with cleaner energy sources.
That's already happening. Which brings us to the next question.
Won't the perceived rapid ramp-up of these renewables make future electric cars much cleaner?
Unfortunately, this is mostly wishful thinking.
Today, the U.S. gets 14% of its electric power from renewables.
In 25 years, Obama's Energy Information Administration
estimates that number will have gone up just 3 percentage points to 17%.
I don't know why Obama's name keeps popping up, because this is supposed to be a scientific
question. But just to clarify, this isn't Obama's Energy Information Administration,
it's a Federal Statistics and Analysis Office that's been operating under seven different
presidents of both political parties and is still going strong today.
And it shows that the United States is already getting 17% of its electricity
from renewable energy. And that's just the U.S. average,
which includes areas that have little interest in renewable energy and no targets.
If we look at the states that do, many of them are looking at renewable targets of
20 to 30%, well before 2040. So getting energy from renewables
is not wishful thinking in places where it's being actively pursued.
It's only wishful thinking in places that do nothing except wishfully think.
But that's not the whole story on how emissions are coming down.
Listen carefully to Lomborg's choice of words as he continues.
Meanwhile, those fossil fuels that generate 65% of U.S. electricity today
will still generate about 64% of it in 2040. So it sounds as though coal will still be
generating the same amount of electricity as it does today.
But Lomborg doesn't use the word coal here. He refers to fossil fuels, which is odd because
there are two main fossil fuels generating electricity, coal and natural gas.
And the EIA always differentiates between them. So why did Lomborg suddenly change the EIA's
classification here and lump them together? It might have something to do with the fact
that these fuels have very different emissions profiles.
Natural gas is a lot less polluting and releases far less CO2 than coal.
So if the mix of fossil fuels changes, that would affect the carbon footprint of electric cars
just as much as changing the percentage of renewables.
So let's look at the figures. The 2015 EIA report, the latest one
available to Lomborg when he made this video, shows that in 2013 coal comprised 39% of the
total. That's the dark grey. Natural gas in red was at 27%.
The same report predicted that by 2040 the proportion of coal would fall to 34%
and natural gas would rise to 31%. So by lumping them together,
Lomborg can make it look as though nothing is changing. The overall percentage stays the same.
But that disguises the fact that because of the changing mix,
these fossil fuels will produce less CO2 and be a lot cleaner.
It's on top of that that we have the rise in renewable energy.
Even those projections are now obsolete. According to the latest EIA report,
coal has already fallen way below 34%, 22 years ahead of prediction.
Natural gas has already surpassed 31%. So the fossil fuel mix has already shifted
in favour of lower CO2 emissions. Lomborg's next complaint is about
the making of the electric car itself, especially the battery.
The mining of lithium, for instance, is not a green activity.
That's true. Lithium mining does a lot of environmental damage.
Just look at this lithium mine in South America. As well as the horrendous scar on the landscape
that you can see, what you can't see is the water taken to extract the lithium,
which leads to depletion from local farms. In Tibet, chemicals used in lithium extraction
have leaked into rivers, killing fish. Tailings from lithium mines worldwide
blot the landscape and contaminate the water table.
Clearly Lomborg's right. Lithium mining is not a green activity.
But of course neither is oil sand mining to make gasoline, or oil shale mining,
or oil extraction by other means, like in-situ oil shale extraction and oil drilling,
or like the transport of oil. Oil leakage and spills also contaminate
water supplies and kill fish. Oil pipelines are a blot on the landscape
and block animal migration routes. Is the environmental damage done by oil
worse than lithium? That would be useful to know.
But for some reason, Lomborg only mentions lithium.
While electric car owners may cruise around feeling virtuous.
OK, again, personal feelings towards electric car owners are irrelevant because that's not science.
Whether you feel people who drive electric cars are feeling virtuous, or pompous, or driving with
a sense of entitlement, that shouldn't be a factor in deciding whether electric cars are greener than
gasoline cars. It's possible these people drive electric cars because they're great value for
money. Even without tax breaks, electric car prices have come down so fast and are so cheap
to run that owners have simply done the math. According to an article in Forbes magazine,
once you figure in the cost of ownership, especially maintenance and fuel,
electric vehicles are a bargain despite the upfront price tag.
If you buy an electric vehicle rather than a gasoline-powered one, you're probably going
to save a lot of money during the time you own it. You don't need to be a member of the Sierra
Club to see the appeal of going electric. So maybe these buyers aren't borderline
functionally retarded, maybe they've just gone through the figures and are smart enough to
understand basic economics. But even if electric car owners did have some sort of personality
disorder that makes them feel virtuous or entitled, however much Lomborg, Crowder,
or Kirchhoff may dislike that, it's still no excuse for misrepresenting scientific facts.
While researching articles about electric cars, I was struck by how many of the negative ones
were either written by Lomborg or were simply copies of his claims by people who hadn't
bothered to check his facts. Time to stop worshipping the electric car by Bjorn Lomborg.
Green cars have a dirty little secret by Bjorn Lomborg. Electric car benefits, just myths,
by Bjorn Lomborg. Don't be fooled, Elon Musk's electric cars aren't about to save the planet,
it's by Bjorn Lomborg. So Lomborg's war on electric cars has been going on for five years now,
which would be fine if he could support his premise that they're not environmentally friendly.
But if the only way he can do that is to make incorrect statements,
omit information, and cherry-pick, then why?
