Hello, everyone.
This video is a follow-up to my previous two videos
about a particularly transphobic article published by BBC News on the 26th of October.
If you haven't seen those, I'd encourage you to go and watch them first.
But, before you go, in the second video, you'll see me say that the deadline to submit complaints
about the article is about to pass, which it now has.
But don't worry, anyone would still like to get involved.
Do come back and watch this video afterwards, because, as it turns out,
there's something new to complain about.
How fun.
So, then, the BBC has been sending out responses to various complaints that were escalated,
and I'll say thank you again to everyone who shared those responses with me.
Now, I've got a few news items to discuss today,
but before we get to those, we should cover the BBC response
and the next step in their complaints process.
And allow me to share with you the response that they sent to me,
which, amazingly enough, is even lazier than the last one they sent.
And let me first quote from my escalated complaint, just to refresh our memories here.
So, I said,
and claims in the article that no high-profile trans women who have spoken about sex and relationships
wanted to speak to her.
This is not true, because she spoke to Chelsea Poe.
I understand fully that the author can include or not include whoever she likes in her article
and do not need this explained to me.
I was getting a little snippy there.
What she cannot do is make false claims about who was interviewed.
The article's claim that no high-profile trans women who have spoken about sex and relationships
wanted to speak to the author is provably false,
and that is what I require a response from the BBC about.
And, in response to this, the BBC replied,
Thank you for getting in touch again to restate your complaint
that an interview with Chelsea Poe did not feature in the article
we're being pressured into sex by some trans women.
They're just taking the piss at this point, aren't they?
We can only reiterate that the choice of interviews which feature in the final version of an article
is the legitimate expression of the editorial judgments, etc.
So, they have again deliberately misunderstood what my complaint was.
Because they have no way to respond legitimately without admitting fault,
they've simply pretended I said something else and are responding to that instead.
Now, the next step involves escalating complaints to the BBC's Executive Complaints Unit, or ECU.
The email response you get from the BBC at this stage should include a link to contact the ECU,
which will take you to a page where you can escalate your complaint again.
Now, there isn't too much for me to add here in terms of arguments that could be made,
as the BBC's overall tactic at this last stage has been to dig in their heels and
repeat what they said in the first stage, even when it doesn't make any sense to do so,
like with the response they sent to me.
So, my ECU complaint is going to largely be me just restating what I said the last time
and explaining why the BBC's response is, again, completely inadequate.
And I'm sure your response will be generally similar to this,
just tailored to statements made in your own individual complaint.
Now, I'd advise that you draft these ECU complaints offline,
because the webpage you reach with the link in the email
will not let you edit your complaint once it's been submitted.
Also, the first time I tried to submit my ECU complaint,
I got an error message saying that something went wrong,
so I had to start the process over by clicking the link in the email again,
and it worked the second time, so watch out for that, I guess.
So then, on to article news, I guess.
Firstly, Chelsea Poe submitted a formal request to the BBC
asking for the footage of her interview with the author of the article, Carolyn Lowbridge,
but the BBC is choosing to withhold that footage,
and it's not hard to imagine why they wouldn't want that interview out there.
Right now, the BBC can just barely plausibly deny
that they knew about the allegations against Lily Cade,
assuming that we believe that Carolyn Lowbridge
never did a basic internet search for Lily Cade's name,
and that the BBC's very rigorous editorial process
just so happened to miss her inclusion.
The much worse story for the BBC would be that Lowbridge
definitely knew about the allegations before publishing the article
and chose to ignore them, which I believe is almost certainly true,
but it is hard to prove definitively without footage of her being told, anyway.
In other news, there was recently a protest held in front of the BBC's London headquarters
in opposition to the BBC's recent transphobic news coverage,
and it had a pretty amazing turnout, considering that it's winter,
it was raining, and there's an ongoing pandemic.
Various folks gave speeches criticizing the BBC's conduct,
including, of course, the article that we've been concerned with.
This protest was covered by several news websites, but it was not covered by the BBC.
Now, if you haven't been paying attention, you might find that rather odd, right?
A big part of the BBC's defense of the article
and its wider coverage of trans issues is their claim of impartiality.
Our commitment to impartiality means we have to cover every angle of a debate,
even if it's unpopular, and even if people don't want to hear it.
And this extends even to the point of platforming absurd conspiracy theorists
like people who believe the Earth is flat.
And this isn't me exaggerating here.
The BBC's director of editorial policy recently stated that
platforming flat Earth as is occasionally appropriate,
and that, quote, if a lot of people believed in flat Earth, we'd need to address it more.
Now, this is an outright abdication of what should be the most basic of journalistic principles,
to report the truth.
The BBC cannot be an impartial observer of public opinion here,
because they also affect public opinion.
If, just because some people believe the Earth is flat,
the BBC started running flat Earth coverage, whatever that would look like,
then they would cause more people to believe it.
Because by being platformed on the BBC,
flat Earth arguments would be given a weight that they otherwise are not.
You can't be impartial when it comes to what is true.
The Earth is not flat, regardless of how many people believe it to be.
That's my hot take for the day there.
And how far does this principle go, exactly?
Some people think the Holocaust was a hoax.
Some people think COVID vaccines contain microchips that control your brain.
You know, is the BBC going to write articles uncritically sharing those views,
just because some people believe them?
Anyway, all that aside, we're left with the BBC's claim of impartiality.
They cover every angle of a debate, so they say.
So where, we can ask, is the coverage of the protest that took place right on their doorstep?
After all, an anonymous self-selecting social media poll of less than a hundred people
was considered important enough to get a several thousand word article on the BBC website.
But a protest right outside their headquarters doesn't get mentioned at all.
So what happened to showing every side of a debate?
Because right now it looks like that excuse only runs in one direction.
It looks like the BBC want to use impartiality as a smokescreen to platform bigotry,
whereas protests against that bigotry get ignored.
Now, I don't like this very much, and I want to do something about it.
And what I'm going to do is, and we all know where this is going by now, don't we?
I'm going to submit a complaint.
Now, the deadline to complain about the article has passed,
but the deadline to complain about the lack of BBC coverage of the protest has not passed.
So here's what I, or we, if you feel so inclined, are going to do.
I'm going to go to the BBC complaints page, linked below,
click on make a complaint, where it says what is your complaint about.
I'm going to select general BBC.
Are you contacting us about a previous complaint?
No.
On the next page, where it says select the best category to describe your complaint,
I'm going to select not enough coverage.
And then I'm going to paste the text of my complaint
about the lack of coverage of the protest, which I'll also share below.
Now, I can't tell you what to do with your own time, of course,
but here's a fun fact for you.
The BBC's current complaint record is 110,000 complaints,
which they received in response to their coverage of Prince Philip's death.
Now, this video will probably get over that number of views,
which means if everyone who's hearing this right now goes to the link below
and submits a complaint, we'd break the BBC's all-time complaint record.
Again, I'm not telling you what to do at all.
It's up to you.
I just thought that was kind of interesting.
Anyway, that's all from me today, folks.
I'll see you next time.
