While I was writing my last video, I collected a bit of information about former President
Obama's house on the coast, because I was having an online discussion with someone.
In the end I decided it's not really worth debunking, because it didn't have much to
do with science. But then it was brought up as an argument in several posts responding
to that video, not just Obama buying coastal property, but also Al Gore, Nancy Pelosi and
Bill Gates. And it turns out this is also a big talking point on the blogosphere.
So I'll treat this as a legitimate question. If sea levels are rising, why are people who
accept the conclusions of oceanographers and climate scientists still buying beachfront
property? Isn't it all going to be underwater? asked one poster.
We'll start with Obama, and this question from a guest blog on WhatsUpWithThat.
Did Obama just buy a beachfront mansion? Rumours are flying that the owner of a beachfront
mansion in Hawaii is none other than President Obama, the same President who warns us that
global warming and rising sea levels are a greater danger to the future of America than
Islamic terrorism. I can now confirm that this story was in fact true. There were rumours
flying that Obama had bought a beachfront mansion in Hawaii. Unfortunately the rumours
turned out to be false. The property had been bought by the head of the Obama Foundation,
Marty Nesbitt. But that didn't prevent the rumours from being upgraded to actual fact.
However, while the Obamas didn't buy this oceanfront property, they did buy another
oceanfront property at Martha's Vineyard, so attention was switched to that. The WhatsUpWithThat
blog tried again. Sea level rise? Obama just bought a beachside
property. Well, not quite. The property is at 79 Turkiland Cove Road in Edgartown, Massachusetts,
which is several hundred metres from the beach and about ten feet above sea level. So if
President Obama really does follow the science, as he professes to do, then he knows that
storm surges aren't going to be an issue, and he knows that even at the extreme high
end of estimates, scientific projections show that the property will be permanently inundated
sometime after the year 2200. That's 180 years from now, by which time Barack and Michelle
will be about 250 years old, and not that bothered. Al Gore also came in for some flak
after buying this house right on the beach. Just a couple to three years after the Nobel
Peace Prize, he and Tipper, well tragically before their divorce, they went out and spent
$9 million on a mansion on the oceanfront in California.
One blogger wrote, Mr Gore just paid nearly $9 million for the property, which according
to his professed beliefs, will likely soon be literally underwater and hence worthless
both as a residence and for resale. The blogger rules out the possibility that Al Gore is
so dumb he'll buy a house he believes will be underwater likely soon, so that leaves
only one possibility, he says, that Mr Gore is a self-conscious, witting liar who doesn't
actually believe his predictions of doom. Of course, Al Gore may be a self-conscious,
witting liar who doesn't actually believe his predictions of doom, who knows? But there
is a very obvious third possibility, which is, way ahead of me, that his house is in
no danger from rising sea levels at all. For a start, this isn't his house. Al Gore's
house is at 1504 East Mountain Drive, Montecito, in the hills overlooking the town, and about
50 feet above sea level. So according to the scientific projections Al Gore professes to
believe his house should be underwater several hundred years after he's dead. I don't have
an exact address for John Kerry's house, but it doesn't matter. Most of Chilmark, where
he bought his house, is also comfortably more than 10 feet above sea level.
So let's try Nancy Pelosi's house. According to an anonymous tweet, and if you can't trust
anonymous tweets on the internet, who can you trust, Nancy bought this house. Clearly
it's right on the water. But sadly, it doesn't seem to belong to Nancy Pelosi. Her office
and the real estate agency selling the house said she isn't the buyer. So unless someone
has evidence other than a tweet, that claim is a non-starter.
The strongest contender is a beach house owned by Bill Gates at 2808 Oceanfront, Delmar,
California. It's not his main residence, but it is only a few feet above sea level and
right next to the beach. So Bill has only another hundred years or so to enjoy his beach
house, then at the age of 160 he'll either have to buy another one or spend more time
in his main residence, or one of the dozen other mansions he owns. The more immediate
problem for Bill is that long before the beach house gets inundated, he'll have to protect
it against storm surges and coastal erosion. The engineering work doesn't come cheap, maybe
upwards of a million dollars. So I hope he's got a bit of cash.
In sum, according to the scientific projections, these wealthy people don't have much to worry
about regardless of their political affiliation or beliefs. There's no scientific evidence
that sea levels will rise by several feet in the next few years, and as far as I know,
none of them has made that claim. Certainly there's no such claim made in the scientific
literature. If you really believe that sea level rise is
a problem, I will guarantee to buy that property for one dollar, because after all it's not
worth anything to you. Well, what a surprise. No one wants to sell
a house which will be snapped up on the market for millions of dollars for just a dollar.
I wonder why. Once again, not a great argument against the science.
In the end, it makes no difference to the science whether Al Gore and Barack Obama are
wonderful people or the most disgusting creatures on earth. Scientific facts are scientific
facts regardless. And the fact that their houses are safely out of harm's way doesn't
matter either. There are much more immediate problems to concern ourselves with than Al
Gore's basement getting flooded a thousand years from now.
So let's have a look at the more interesting question of why people buy beachfront properties
that really are vulnerable. If it's so close to disaster, why is it that
oceanfront mansions are selling better than ever? Record prices, record numbers.
That's a very good question. And not just for property with a limited lifetime due to
sea level rise, but also associated problems like subsidence, shifting sands and coastal
erosion. Even in Miami, where many of the scientists
say it's going to hit first and be worse there. Actually, I've heard that it's already happening.
That's right, it is. Some buyers are now taking height above sea level into consideration,
along with square footage and proximity to schools and stores when buying a house in
South Florida. And so are mortgage lenders and insurance companies. And that is having
some effect on property prices. But that's only some buyers. What about the rest?
This map of property prices shows that the most expensive areas, the darker green colours,
are along the coast. Why? Well, obviously one reason is that living
or retiring near the beach is a popular dream. So buyers over 40 aren't going to worry about
what will happen to their property due to rising sea levels in 50 years' time. By then
they'll be too old or too dead to care. And since only 73% of Americans believe the science
anyway, the rest will be quite happy to buy coastal property, whatever the projections
are. The buyers we need to look at are those who
do accept the science and plan to sell their properties in 20 or 30 years, or pass them
on to their offspring. They have a calculation to make. They know that in 100 years, scientific
projections show that the sea may be permanently covering the floor of a $400,000 house they
want to buy. So they know that somewhere between their house being worth $400,000 now and nothing
100 years from now, prices will have to stop rising at some point and start to fall. The
problem is that they don't know when that transition point will be. If they manage to
sell before the decline begins, then they get to enjoy the beach lifestyle they want
for a limited time and then sell at a healthy profit. But if they don't, then they risk
being left holding a property few people want to buy in a falling market. There were some
interesting experiments conducted along these lines by economist Vernon Smith in the 1980s
which showed this very starkly. Test subjects were given some money and told to trade imaginary
shares. They were told the real value of each share would start at $3.60 and decline over
time. So at the end of the game, any shares they had left would be worth just $0.24. As
an incentive to try as hard as they could to make a profit, they were allowed to keep
whatever profit they made at the end of the experiment.
To begin with, the shares were offered to them at a lower price than their actual value,
usually around $2 a share, just like a real IPO, and then they started trading. Obviously
since the test subjects knew the shares were worth more than the $2 trading price, they
started buying shares, and the trading price therefore moved upwards. Now you would have
thought that when the trading price met the actual value of the shares, people would want
to cash in and sell. After all, they knew that from that point onwards, the value of
their shares would decline. But they didn't. They kept on buying, and so the trading price
kept going up. It seemed that regardless of fundamental value, the more prices went up,
the more people wanted to buy, and the more they wanted to buy, the more the prices went
up. Halfway through, they were trading shares way above their actual value, and they were
getting closer to the end of the game where the shares would be almost worthless. It was
only when some traders lost their nerve and decided to cash in their profits that the
price curve flattened out. When others saw that prices were no longer going up, there
was a scramble to get out of the market. The result was a classic asset bubble, and Vernon
Smith got the same bubble with different groups of people, even experienced market traders.
Think about the housing bubble. Buyers, sellers, borrowers, lenders, real estate agents, government
regulators, everybody believed that prices would rise and continue to rise. And that
is kind of the essence of one of these, of a bubble. So substitute property prices for
share prices, and we come back to the same puzzling question. Why don't buyers recognize
the long-term reality? I don't have a Nobel Prize in economics, like Vernon Smith, so
I'll let him give the answer, when he was asked the same question during an interview.
They don't recognize that the value is declining or they don't care.
Well, let me just say, right now, that we don't understand why it is that people get
caught up in self-reinforcing expectations of rising prices.
So there it is. We can understand the physics of why sea levels are rising, and we can measure
that rise, but we still don't understand why humans make irrational economic decisions.
Of course, there'll be a thousand Nobel Prize candidates in the comments forum with a thousand
different theories explaining it, and they'll all be right. But whatever the reason, it's
not a good idea to bet that because people make irrational or emotional decisions in
the marketplace, then science must be wrong.
A hundred years before the sea covers low-lying parts of South Florida may seem like a long
time, but long before we get permanent inundation, the storm surges and king tides that occasionally
flood the region will become more regular and more destructive. So anyone planning to
sell a house 25 years from now, the life of a typical mortgage, will be trying to sell
to people who know that saltwater will likely be invading their home dozens of times during
the lifetime of their own mortgage. And the banks and insurance companies know that too.
So more and more people are going to do what some forward-thinking buyers are already doing
– weigh height above sea level into the value of the house and pay accordingly. And
that point of hesitancy is the point at which the bubble starts to burst.
Of course, you can say, that's no big deal, people will just move. And that's true.
The economy can probably absorb the collapse of the vulnerable part of the Florida real
estate market, which is worth about $8.7 trillion. But the problem is a lot bigger than a few
million residential homes in suburban Florida. For a start, there's the infrastructure
in coastal cities all over the world, which is a lot more expensive and a lot harder to
move. On top of that, there are more immediate problems associated with climate change, such
as water shortages for billions of people as glaciers disappear, or wildfires, salination,
disappearing coral reefs and fisheries, droughts and floods. If you think mitigating these
problems involves some kind of world communist government, take a look at the video where
I show what's being done to shift from fossil fuel energy to clean energy under the Free
Enterprise system, you might be surprised.
Before I go, I have to apologise to all those who say their posts aren't showing up or
disappearing from the channel. Inevitably, there are accusations that I'm censoring
criticism, which is clearly nonsense as you can see by reading through the hundreds of
critical comments on my channel. What's happening is that YouTube is automatically
sending a lot of posts directly to spam, both critical and supportive, for reasons
that I can't fathom. Here are some of them in the spam folder, see what you can find
wrong with those. Consequently, I have to clear out the spam folder every now and again,
but it takes a long time and it's a pretty thankless task. So if your post doesn't
show up, it's a good idea to make a copy of your comment before you post it, and if
it doesn't show up, try again, or complain to YouTube. If your post is a violation of
my channel rules against advertising, racism and plagiarism, then let me know why you think
those rules are unfair. And on another issue, I've been successful
in getting this channel monetised, but I was unsuccessful in getting it monetised for the
benefit of the charity that I support, Health in Harmony. YouTube doesn't allow the content
creator to be in one country and the beneficiary in another. I could of course allow advertisements,
name myself as the beneficiary and pass the money on, but that leaves me open to claims
that I've monetised this channel for my own benefit. A number of people have tried
to claim that I'm making these videos for financial gain or deliberately making clickbait,
and as long as the channel isn't monetised for my own benefit, those claims are pretty
easily rebuffed. So rather than lay myself open to charges of profiting, I'd rather
continue to make these videos for free and ask that people donate to the charity listed
in the video description. Knowing that I'm helping them do important work in saving lives
and protecting forests is what keeps me going. The only exception is going to be the occasional
educational video, so out of the hundreds of videos I've made, I have monetised one.
This one. And I'm planning to make another on how mountains are formed, and I'll monetise
that one too. Everything else is free. So thanks to those who've contributed to the
charity, raising around $200,000, and I hope you'll continue to be generous as you watch
more videos.
