It's 852 here in New York, I'm Bryant Gumbel.
We understand that there has been a plane crash on the southern tip of Manhattan.
You're looking at the World Trade Center.
We understand that a plane has crashed into the World Trade Center.
We don't know anything more than that.
We don't know if it was a-
So when this episode won the last poll for Pick A Historical Event, I was honestly kind
of hoping 9-11 would win because I hadn't really seen a retrospective on how 9-11 has
been depicted in the media over the last 15 years.
And yes, it has been 15 years.
And I wasn't really taking into account one very important element that is a part of this
show, that being the cultural elements that go into what shapes the media in question.
And if you give it more than a passing thought, it's like thousands of people died and it
led to the longest war in American history that we're still in.
It's kind of a bummer.
So this ended up being a lot more difficult than I thought it would be, you know, trying
to connect the dots of the media depictions of this incident that defies words.
It was difficult, but I'm going to try.
Keyword try.
So before we get into it, know that there will be lots of images depicting the destruction
of the World Trade Center and its periphery.
And also acknowledgement, especially as a New Yorker, that this was a real thing that
happened recently.
It is, as of this taping, the most destructive act of terrorism and one of the most devastating
losses of life to have ever taken place on American soil.
So let me start by saying I don't know what your reaction is when the topic or image of
9-11 is mentioned.
It could be grief, it could be indifference, it could be a conviction that jet fuel can't
melt steel beams, and if you're anything like me, blinding white hot rage that that phrase
is even still a thing that people take seriously.
We all come into this with different perspectives, different degrees of intimacy to the tragedy.
From actual loss of a family member in the attacks to no reaction at all.
So while there is some goofy stuff in these two episodes, because there have been some
goofy depictions of 9-11, this will be more on the serious business end.
Ground Zero is literally five miles away from where I am sitting right now.
Any world event can influence media trends, but few influence mainstream media in quite
the way that 9-11 did.
Not only did it change the topics we were willing to tackle, but also the aesthetic.
There's a particular awkwardness watching Armageddon now, not just because of how it
visually mirrors what happened, but how it doesn't.
We all know now that that's not what skyscrapers look like when they fall.
It basically killed the public's appetite to see images of wholesale destruction for
several years.
So before we actually get into the media part, I want to talk a little bit about collective
trauma, which is exactly what it sounds like.
It is trauma that affects groups, often by proxy.
For instance, the Holocaust to the Jewish people, or the Armenian genocide to the Armenian
diaspora, and 9-11 to Americans, which is the most pronounced instance of collective
trauma since Pearl Harbor.
There was a study released in 2008 concluding that in the days following the attacks, nearly
half of Americans reported symptoms of post-traumatic stress, and many of these symptoms remained
elevated in the following weeks and months.
But there was no one uniform way that these post-traumatic symptoms actually manifested.
The study identified reactions of anger and political intolerance, gratitude and spirituality,
and even changes in patterns of normal language use, social behavior, cognitive processing.
So you can't say that 9-11 made us all of a sudden more xenophobic, or more inclusive,
or united, or uniformly more anything, because it's not that simple.
The trauma is collective, yes, but the coping mechanisms are all over the place.
But you can say that the events did trigger a search for attributional meaning.
And that's where media depictions come in, because that is the point of art and media.
It is the one thing we have to help us make sense of our existence.
According to another study, the sense that one has actually found meaning in the event
is correlated with lower post-traumatic stress, and the media that we as a culture create
and consume is an integral part of that process.
So it is time to go back in time.
All the way back, back, back, back to September 11th, 2001.
The most devastating terrorist attack in modern history.
What happens next?
Well, of course, first we have to hastily re-edit things that were already done
to fit this radically changed new world.
After all, a ton of movies and TV shows take place in New York and are filmed in New York,
and we are now in a world where there are no Twin Towers anymore.
That's awkward.
There was a scene in the original Spider-Man trailer showing a helicopter caught in a web
between the Twin Towers, and well, that got deleted.
The World Trade Center was digitally removed from films like
Zoolander, Serendipity, and Kissing Jessica Stein.
And scenes from Spy Game, The Time Machine, and The Bourne Identity were edited
because of their visual resemblance to the wreckage of the towers.
The latter extensively so due to terrorism as a major part of the storyline.
Men in Black 2 originally featured a climax that included the World Trade Center,
and the final version has changed to the Statue of Liberty.
The original ending of Lilo and Stitch featured...
this.
Hold on!
And this ending, which was already mostly animated by 9-11,
was reanimated to change the city's skyline to mountains,
and 747 to something more alien-y.
Stitch did 9-11.
Meanwhile, on television, the opening credits of shows like The Sopranos and
Law & Order SVU were edited to remove the Twin Towers.
There was also an episode of Friends where Chandler and Monica could not get on their
flight for their honeymoon because Chandler joked about a bomb in the airport.
Look at that. Federal law prohibits any joking regarding aircraft hijacking or bombing.
You don't have to worry about me, ma'am. I take my bombs very seriously.
Sir, you want to come with us?
And that scene got rewritten and reshot.
Even shows like Power Rangers, Pokemon, Transformers, Robots in Disguise,
and Invader Zim had episodes taken off the air.
Invader Zim had other series edits too, like, well...
changing this scene.
All that you know and love lies in ruins.
And also changing the colors of explosions in other episodes to make them more cartoony-looking.
And during this period of hasty edits came also a period of...
this.
We'd be here all day if we ran through even a decent sampling of the Heartfelt Tribute songs.
Here is what the Wikipedia page on the subject of songs about 9-11 looks like.
But there was a certain genre in particular that was fond of the Heartfelt Tribute.
Yes, before the days of Florida Georgia Line, when we sang about trucks and girls in America,
it was a different, more sincere time,
where we sang about trucks and girls in America, but, you know, more angry.
As far as mainstream music that happened in that first couple of years,
it tended to fall into three categories.
Jingoistic bro country.
And it's gonna be hell when you hear mother freedom start a-ragging her bell.
Sad bro country.
Where were you when the world stopped turning?
That September day.
And a sprinkling of dipshit trutherism.
Why do people push pounds and powder?
Why did Bush knock down the towers?
Yeah.
Why did Bush knock down the towers?
Because the Illuminati told him to.
Duh.
And if you're wondering why the comments on this are disabled, that crowd is why.
But after the initial reaction,
we had enough time to start incorporating it into fictionalized narratives,
and that's where it starts to get really interesting.
One of the first to address it, of course, was South Park in the episode
Osama Bin Laden Has Farty Pants.
Remember when life used to be simple and cool?
Not really.
Which aired about eight weeks after the attacks,
and it hasn't gone down as a classic in no small part
because it feels like it was written in about an hour.
Skipping addressing the event itself,
the plot deals almost entirely with the invasion of Afghanistan,
as well as paradising the fear the media was pushing at the time.
Hey Sharon, maybe you should stop watching the news for a little bit.
Sharon, you've been watching CNN for about eight weeks now.
Don't you want to watch something else?
It's totally different from today.
Ramadan!
Hey look, an infidel!
Yet it devotes almost the entire second half of the episode
to Cartman and Bin Laden in a sort of Bugs Bunny and Elmer Fudd tete-a-tete.
They're still digging through the rubble,
but yeah, tiny penis if that makes you feel better.
Okay.
And yet it ends with such a sincere, actually patriotic affirmation.
America may have some problems, but it's our home.
Our team.
And if you don't want to root for your team,
then you should get the hell out of the stadium.
See, even Matt Stone and Trey Parker were kind of going for some sort of catharsis.
In this case, by A, making Bin Laden look like a harmless buffoon with a tiny penis.
That'll show him.
But B, despite ragging on America, reavowing loyalty to it.
Go America.
Go America.
9-11 was a recurring South Park topic.
The aforementioned country songs were parodied in A Ladder to Heaven the following year.
Now he's here once again to capitalize on people's emotions.
See, when country stars sing about the thing,
it's shamelessly capitalizing on the thing,
which is totally different from when comedians do it.
Mmm, yeah, yeah, yeah.
9-11.
In season 10, the episode Mystery of the Urinal Deuce,
they take on 9-11 conspiracy theories.
And this one is easily the strongest of the group,
probably because it wasn't written in an hour.
All I had to do was have explosives planted in the base of the towers.
Then on 9-11, we pretended like four planes were being hijacked,
and really, we just re-rided them to Pennsylvania,
then flew two military jets in the World Trade Center filled with more explosives,
and shot down all the witnesses in Flight 93 with an F-15
after blowing up the Pentagon with a cruise missile.
It was only the world's most intricate, flawlessly executed plan ever, ever.
Really?
On the complete other end of the spectrum,
you have the West Wing episode Isaac and Ishmael.
It was also one of the first scripted TV series to respond to the attacks,
featuring the aftermath of a nondescript similar attack
that takes place in this universe, albeit a non-canon attack, apparently.
It was written and filmed within two weeks of 9-11.
Sorkin himself wrote this one,
and it has a lot of Sorkin-esque rhetorical devices.
I don't know about Irving Berlin,
but your ridiculous search for rational reasons
why somebody straps a bomb to their chest is ridiculous.
You just called me ridiculous twice in one sentence.
Hardly a record for me.
People really liked it at the time
because of the characters speaking in this authoritative, hopeful way,
but it has not really aged well.
So why is everybody trying to kill us?
Not everybody.
It seems like everybody.
It's just the Arabs.
Saying the Arabs is too general.
Not only do terrorists always fail at what they're after,
they pretty much always succeed in strengthening whatever it is they're against.
Uh...
No.
And this is also the problem with spitting something out like this so fast.
In the end, it has a very quick, you know, say-something-ness to it.
Don't you consider this something noble about being a martyr?
Bartlett's over here like,
is this kid devil's advocating 9-11?
We don't need martyrs right now.
We need heroes.
In December of that year,
Marvel decided to put their take in an issue of The Amazing Spider-Man
called The Black Issue,
and it starts...
I agree, Spider-Man.
Must we?
It's all about coming together against the greater adversity of terrorism.
Even the supervillains put aside their differences.
Really?
Really?
Really?
Yeah, it, uh...
It was a different time.
So a couple years pass,
and by now we've had enough time to write 9-11 into some movies.
One of the first and easily the strongest film in this entire list is Spike Lee's 25th Hour.
And part of what makes it so strong is the fact that 9-11 is a prominent backdrop in the story,
but the film isn't really about 9-11.
Fuck Osama Bin Laden, Al Qaeda, and backward-ass cave-dwelling fundamentalist assholes everywhere.
On the names of innocent thousands murdered,
I pray you spend the rest of eternity with your 72 cores roasting in a jet-fueled fire in hell.
It was in production in 2001,
and you do get the impression that it was hastily rewritten to include this backdrop.
But in the end, that sort of cognitive dissonance fits in really well with the narrative proper,
especially the scene where Monty goes on his tirade
about how much he hates every aspect of New York.
Fuck this whole city and everyone in it.
From the row houses of Astoria to the penthouses on Park Avenue.
From the projects in the Bronx to the lofts in Soho.
But the way it's shot captures such conflicting emotions,
which is a common response after any kind of trauma.
Let an earthquake crumble it.
Let the fires rage.
Let it burn to fucking ash,
and then let the waters rise and submerge this whole rat-infested place.
Barry Pepper, who plays his friend,
actually lives in this apartment downtown which overlooks Ground Zero.
The New York Times says the air's bad down here.
Oh yeah?
Well, fuck the Times.
I read the Post.
And he brushes this fact off like it's no big deal,
meanwhile Philip Seymour Hoffman's characters like,
maybe this isn't a good idea.
All three characters reflecting different emotional responses to trauma,
running the gamut.
Denial, worry, and anger.
Fuck the corrupt cops with their anus-violating plungers
and their 41 shots standing behind a blue wall of silence.
You betray our trust!
So 25th Hour is great, but it goes downhill pretty quickly from there.
One of the more bizarre relics from this era
is a made-for-television Showtime drama called DC 9-11, Time of Crisis.
Made in that brief period of time before Bush and Cheney
were generally regarded as two of history's greatest monsters.
You wanted the job.
Maybe this is why.
This one reenacts the events of 9-11 from the point of George W. Bush
and how hard it was for him, present-intenting.
And it is staggeringly boring when it doesn't feel like a parody wrapped in a dream.
Some passengers on cell phones figured out what was happening
and they took matters into their own hands.
God bless their souls.
Take, for instance, this sensitive scene between Bush and Cheney.
I'm gonna need you at my side at all times.
Go and see the urn.
Main thrust, Dick, is to protect the line of succession.
It was a different time.
A similar made-for-TV movie starring James Woods was made about Rudy Giuliani
for USA Network around the same time.
It was called Rudy, The Rudy Giuliani Story.
And, well, it's more watchable than DC 9-11, Time of Crisis.
This is New York City.
I love this city.
Despite mostly having nothing to do with 9-11,
except for, hey, look, he was mayor when it happened.
Yes, before James Woods was suing lazy Twitter users who called him a cocaine addict,
he was doing feature-length campaign ads for Rudy 2008.
Okay, got it. All New Yorkers together.
And ne'er a more starry-eyed campaign ad could Rudy have wished for.
What have these bastards done to my city?
God, how I love this city.
Most of it's actually about Rudy's life building up to 9-11
and spends a weird amount of time on his infidelities
and most of it ends up being about Giuliani's women's.
In a weird way, it accidentally cops to the fact that 9-11
was the greatest career boost Giuliani could have ever hoped for.
And then there's jingoism for kids.
Tiger Cruise was a Disney Channel original movie starring Hayden Panettiere and Bill Pullman,
which intertwines a fictional storyline about a Navy admiral
who gets to take his daughter on a family-based tiger cruise
where his kids get to see what this Navy business is all about.
How many elementary schools did I go to?
Oh, Maddie, come on.
Hayden is tired of being a Navy brat, see,
and wants to talk her dad out of military life
and eventually he's like, okay, honey.
I decided I'm not gonna re-up.
But then 9-11 happens.
Until we know the full extent and nature of these attacks,
we're gonna assume the worst and stay on full alert.
Then when the serious thing happens, it's not a huge deal.
Nothing waving a big ol' American flag won't fix.
There are even two characters who lose a family member at the Pentagon,
but, you know, they handle it pretty well.
Listen, I'm sorry about your uncle.
Thanks, it helps to keep busy, you know?
In fairness to this thing, it is the rare
dad-you-need-to-work-less-and-spend-more-time-with-your-family movie
that ends with, actually, never mind, you do your damn job, dad.
I think you should keep doing what you're doing.
Five years out from 9-11,
we started to see higher profile and higher budget feature films
that were true stories not about political figures,
but about people who were actually there,
and the most well known came out pretty close to each other.
The first was Oliver Stone's World Trade Center.
See, you gotta talk to me, because ahhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh
And there were concerns before it came out,
with Oliver Stone directing it and
Oliver Stone having been prone to truthiness in the past.
Ahem.
And by 2006, 9-11 truthiness was really catching on,
especially in light of the 9-11 commission report.
But Stone held back on his truthiness and mostly it's just boring.
Although the intro does remind me of Armageddon.
I want to go shopping.
Me too!
It's mostly a trapped in a hole movie,
with the towers falling about 20 minutes in,
and Nicolas Cage and Michael Peña being trapped under the rubble
for two hours with Nott,
but Nicolas Cage is...
I think that's supposed to be a New York accent?
Every wife, I feel the pain less,
but I'm more numb.
And eventually they get dug out.
I'd call it dull and inoffensive,
but while some of the families of the men portrayed in the movie signed off,
others, namely family members of the dead portrayed in the film,
weren't too thrilled.
And you could call this the apex of capitalizing on tragedy,
but we're nowhere near done yet.
Paul Greengrass took a more Paul Greengrass approach
to his take on the passengers of United 93
retaliating against the hijackers in United 93.
This is a suicide mission.
We have to do something.
At the time, Greengrass was best known for the Irish film Bloody Sunday
and The Bourne Supremacy,
so the Greengrass approach was shaky cameras,
lots and lots of natural looking lighting,
and minimal score.
Unlike World Trade Center,
United 93 had no-name actors,
lending to its legitimacy,
and since it wasn't trying to be an overlong sincere snooze fest,
it was the stronger of the two,
but, you know, it wasn't that great.
The further away we get from 9-11,
the less people quite know what to do with it.
Hollywood had gotten the serious topical movies out of its system,
and that didn't really work.
Nobody really wanted it,
and yet it was inevitable.
And after neither of those two movies were award-season darlings,
Hollywood kind of backed off from movies about 9-11 for a while.
Although that was hardly the end of it.
See, Americans in general are really turned off
by the idea of capitalizing on this tragedy anyway.
Even though it's kind of impossible not to capitalize on it.
Like, I'm capitalizing on it right now.
No matter how solemn or respectful or irreverent or disrespectful,
that's all a form of capitalizing on it,
because it's an inescapable thing.
Our world is shaped by it.
Everything from the Patriot Act,
to the Snowden leaks,
to the Syrian refugee crisis,
and even Brexit.
All of these things came at least as a partial fallout
of the way 9-11 affected the world.
So, while you might think I've hit all of the obvious ones,
this topic runs pretty deep,
and we've got a long way to go.
