♪♪
When it was first announced,
RWBY seemed like it was gonna be great.
It was produced by a darling of independent web content
and created by a legendary animation genius
and some of his most trusted colleagues
and written by two...
but even with all this stuff in place,
RWBY's pretty bad.
The basic concept, a 3-D anime about monster hunters,
is great, and when it tries to flesh this out,
there's some really interesting ideas at times,
and in brief moments, it's got scenes or segments
that suddenly really work,
but overall, it's confusing and frustrating.
It isn't fun to watch,
and no matter how much attention you give it,
your attention is only rewarded
with more writing or animation problems.
It's not, like, the worst show ever made,
but RWBY's failures matter
because it really could have been something,
and that makes the parts that were good even sadder
because you can always see what it could have been
and maybe almost was.
I wanna just call this garbage and move on with my life,
but it's just not that simple,
which is a shame for me.
It means I can't use the most popular video title
I use when I criticize media.
Is this it? Is this gonna be on my fucking gravestone?
Eight long years into production
with a massive crew by web video standards
and its eighth season on the way.
Sorry, volume. They call them volume?
The show has garnered a pretty large following
and a super devout fan base,
and it's easy to see why.
The show frequently threatens to suddenly become good.
People saw what it promised
and believed it would deliver.
The pieces are all still there,
and sometimes, just often enough
for people to keep watching,
it looks like they're going to fall into place.
♪♪
But they never have,
and it's starting to become clear
that they probably never will,
and that makes the show infinitely more disappointing
than something you could easily say is worse,
and the reasons why the show has failed
to become what it could have been
are multitudinous and interlinked.
There's a million distractingly small problems
that ultimately aren't that big a deal
and weaken real criticism
by being given too much attention,
and every major problem ties into
and is responsible for every other major problem
in a way that makes it almost impossible to unpick.
RWBY may be the first show ever to be holistically bad,
but do not despair, fellow believers
in objective analysis of cartoons.
I'm here to defend you
and eviscerate RWBY with a sword
made of logic and reason.
It's a metaphorical sword, really.
Oh, also it can turn into a gun
because that would be cool.
Uh, this is how media criticism works, right?
So this time on the increasingly infrequent
cries for help my family refuses to believe is my job,
I'll be exploring the problems that started
in the early years of the show's development,
how they set the tone for a show
that never quite ended up where it could have been,
why it matters that such a promising thing
turned out this way,
and exactly how and why so many decent ideas
can often get misunderstood
when writers simply borrow them from other shows they like.
I'm focusing primarily on the first three seasons
of the show in this video
because RWBY can be pretty neatly divided
into two separate eras
with two different sets of problems
that don't fully overlap,
and for the purposes of criticism,
I intend to treat them as distinct entities
in most cases.
If you're a fan of the show,
you're probably dreading the worst here,
although if you're a fan of the second half of the show,
you probably already agree
with most of what I'm going to say,
but in any case, if you like RWBY
and you still watch this video,
I love you and thank you for joining me on this journey.
My goal isn't to make anyone think less of a show,
just to think more about it.
It's important to be critical of media you enjoy,
and there is a lot to enjoy about RWBY,
so I hope to give credit where it's due,
and in the places that aren't as good,
well, that's way more interesting.
It's often said that failure
is one of the best learning experiences,
and in that respect,
RWBY has a lot of good things to teach.
Oh, do we not have a cool animated intro for this video?
It's about an anime. It would've been kind of cool.
Are we just going with the standard?
What? It's fine. I mean, it's a bit underwhelming, but...
Hey, do you all remember Rooster Teeth?
No, I don't mean AT&T's, Warner Media's,
Otter Media's Rooster Teeth,
the company with hundreds of employees
that makes podcasts and shows and movies and games.
Rooster Teeth is starting video game development.
It's a company that's been around for a long time.
It's a company that's been around for a long time.
It's a company that's been around for a long time.
It's a company that's been around for a long time.
I mean, Rooster Teeth,
the five or so people who made
Red vs. Blue in their bedroom.
Hey. Yeah?
You ever wonder why we're here?
It's one of life's great mysteries, isn't it?
Popular on the web in the early years was machinima.
People would pose and act characters in games,
effectively using video games as a medium for making movies.
Not in my diner, you don't know Lumberjacks.
The new city design, it just say no Lumberjacks.
Oh, yeah, I didn't see that sign.
Red vs. Blue wasn't the first attempt
to make something like this,
but it was far and away the most popular one.
All right, here's the plan.
And it was shockingly successful.
People who had no idea what machinima was
knew about Red vs. Blue.
How many people could make a show half as good as this
using what amounts to a microphone
and a copy of Halo?
I certainly couldn't, and I know because I tried,
and I'm so glad no one saw that.
I was saved by not knowing how to upload videos
when I was 12.
YouTube would simply not accept my Windows Movie Maker file.
As a business, 2000's Rooster Teeth
were incredibly smart, a tiny team producing
a fairly simple show made in a video game engine
but managing to promote it and build it
into a recognizable brand of its own.
The show had merch.
Not Halo merch, but Red vs. Blue merch.
Rooster Teeth had done what was basically impossible
and successfully built a business making machinima.
Not even machinima did that.
So yeah, well done to Bernie Burns
and the rest of the team.
Anyway, then it kept going for, like,
a decade while I wasn't looking.
No, really. They're still making Red vs. Blue
over at Rooster Teeth.
Did you know that?
Can you conceive of the idea
that a show you had fun with in your bedroom
when you were in high school is 17 seasons deep?
I found that out while I was working on this video
and a friend told me that they're on season 17.
It's still hitting me.
Why haven't they stopped?
Well, it's not because the creators of Red vs. Blue
had 17 years of ideas in them.
Rooster Teeth isn't a small company
whose people can do what they want creatively anymore.
They've been bought.
They're part of a large conglomerate now
and their work isn't just a show they like making for fun
because they had a nice idea.
It's an intellectual property with a capital I and P,
and they're gonna keep making it for as long
as it theoretically makes money
no matter how little anyone wants to make it.
As Bernie has always said,
as long as people like it, we will keep making it.
Yep, so shut the fuck up.
And even once you hate it,
even once you're totally fed up with it,
you're like, just stop. We'll still be there.
We're gonna milk the shit out of it.
Every penny is worth it.
Meanwhile, in another corner of the internet,
another form of early web hashtag content
was being produced.
A guy named Monty Oum was putting 3D animations
of some incredibly cool fights on the internet
on places like early YouTube and DeviantArt
and game trailers.
God, remember game trailers?
Oh, I feel so old now.
His most long-running work was the Dead Fantasy series,
short fights featuring the female characters
from Dead or Alive and Final Fantasy.
These animations are still really cool.
They're basically just characters you know
from stuff fighting, but that's all they have to be.
The fights feel desperate, violent, impactful,
cool, fast, and incredibly technical.
There's nothing quite as good as these
at the things these are doing,
but perhaps the most well-known Monty animation
was released in 2007.
It was called Haloid.
Haloid is utterly fantastic.
Halo Man beats up hundreds of Halo aliens,
but then Metroid Man turns up and they fight,
but then it turns out Metroid Man is a girl
and then they fight each other again
and also more aliens in a big sequence so epic
only music taken directly from the Matrix Reloaded's
Burly Brawl scene could possibly do it justice,
and they even pay homage to some scenes
from that fight while they're at it.
They blow all the aliens up and escape,
reenacting another cool scene
from the Matrix Reloaded in the process,
but then it turns out that Halo Man was also a girl.
Oh, my God!
And then they watch the sun set.
Ah, that's nice.
Maybe I'm being overly sentimental
about some animated fights,
but the late, great Monty Oum was basically a genius
at what he did.
The guy passed away really tragically
and suddenly in 2015,
but the body of work he left behind
is genuinely fantastic and inspirational.
It's fascinating to me that stuff Monty made for fun,
for free in a couple of weeks
is infinitely more dynamic and fun and engaging
than stuff real, big-budget animation productions
have put together.
I can barely think of a handful of things
that even remotely compare.
For a time, Rooster Teeth and Monty Oum
were just their own things off in their own corners
of the Internet, but then, 2010, PAX.
Rooster Teeth premiere a new episode of Red vs. Blue.
It's standard fare for the show, really.
Familiar characters, familiar engine limitations,
cute meta jokes about how nerfed the pistol was
in the new Halo game.
You know, these things aren't quite as effective
as they used to be.
We're robbing...now.
But then...
Do you want to hear a...
♪♪
More?
♪♪
How much longer does it take, asshole?
-♪♪
I wasn't there when this happened,
but I remember going as wild as this crowd did
when I saw this episode online.
Oh, my God!
-♪♪
The limitations of the Halo games had been broken.
Who could be behind it?
Oh, who am I kidding? You know who's behind it.
You've guessed this bit.
We saw a short film called Haloid
by a gentleman by the name of Monty Oum.
-♪♪
And we were extremely impressed by what we saw.
This is, if you haven't seen it before,
it's a piece where Master Chief fights Metroid.
Wow, Bernie.
Video game knowledge check fail.
It's Sergeant Metroid.
Have some respect for the troops.
Monty had been hired in secret by Rooster Teeth
to work on animation for the new season of Red vs. Blue.
For almost 10 years now, I've been so in love
with how they introduce him.
He's literally in the audience and they say,
hey, Monty's here now, and he just gets up
and joins in as the fourth panelist.
It's excellent showmanship
and also just really kind of beautiful.
So now in Red vs. Blue,
there were suddenly tons of interesting
and creative animated sequences
and when some kind of fight was going to happen
instead of being in-engine characters
standing and shooting at each other
and being kind of boring, it'd be a Monty-Ohm fight.
These sequences really added a lot to the series.
All right, now you're just showing off.
Well, that's a big thing. We like doing team-up stuff, right?
And we found Monty on the Internet.
Here's something he's doing that's really cool
that we can't do so we're just gonna come together
and make something cool.
As they grew, they expanded their production
of other shows and podcasts and became a media entity
which would eventually be worthy of the ultimate prize,
being bought and turned into a subsidiary
of a larger media conglomerate.
However, their biggest show and Monty's animations
were still technically just fan works
of someone else's intellectual property.
Monty and the others clearly wanted to paint
on a bigger canvas and have a fresh start.
Monty wanted to create something as expressive
and unique and stylish as the anime and video games
that had inspired him.
Like, Monty and I are working on right now
a whole series that's just not machinima at all.
It's just animation stuff.
Right. And we're throwing around ideas for that.
This show would turn out to be called RWBY
and the first of four trailers for the series
was released with the conclusion
of Red vs. Blue season 10.
But, uh, RWBY, which we finally showed a trailer for
at the conclusion of Red vs. Blue season 10 last night.
Fuck yeah. We're fucking excited.
It's, it's awesome.
Now, obviously, I'm kind of biased against this show.
I'm making a whole video about why I didn't like it.
Keep this in mind when I say that
RWBY's Red trailer fucking owns.
["RWBY's Red Trailer"]
It's an extravaganza of violence,
visual style, speed, timing,
and this is one of the most fantastic things ever.
Everyone who saw this flipped the fuck out.
Holy shit, it's a scythe that turns into a gun.
Oh! The Red trailer has 15 million views on YouTube.
That's more than any episode of RWBY.
That's more than any episode of Red vs. Blue.
The first episode has 14 million views
and just for the record, uh, the second episode has 6.8.
The only things on Rooster Teeth's channel
with more views are the really cool Monty fight
from Red vs. Blue season eight which I already showed
which they uploaded on its own separately from the show
because they knew it was amazing,
a joke Angry Birds movie trailer
that went viral twice, you know, once when it came out
and then again when actual trailers
for the actual real Angry Birds movie started coming out
and, uh, Minecraft Let's Play because of course.
The trailer is very simple.
This Red character visits a grave
then gets accosted by werewolves
before fighting and killing dozens of them
but it's so much more than that.
It's so cool looking, so good feeling to watch
and just so alive with motion
that it sells the show right away.
You immediately want to see more of it
and know what's going on in this world.
Welcome back, by the way.
I'm saying that because half the people watching this video
remembered the Red trailer while I was talking about it
and paused to go watch it again.
Another thing I want to bring up while we're here
is that this is the best piece of music
Jeff Williams has ever composed.
Jeff had been doing music for Rooster Teeth
since early in the Red vs. Blue days
and while he was clearly talented,
there wasn't much room in Red vs. Blue
most of the time for his music to shine
and this trailer really gives him the chance to do that
and he clearly latched onto it like a limpet.
The song in this trailer introduces
a really powerful motif.
It's this bit here.
["Limpet"]
It has a surprising amount of versatility.
It gets used later in this fight
in a much more intense variation.
["Limpet"]
This sound will basically be Ruby's,
both the show and the characters,
central theme for the rest of the series.
They knew they had something great with this
and they just went with it.
The White trailer introduces us to a character
called Weiss who appears to be a singer
and intercuts her singing with a sequence
where she fights a giant knight with a rapier
with a revolver in the handle.
She has more of a magic-oriented fight style
and the fight's pretty good.
I really like how expressive the visuals are
in these first two trailers.
The world is stark colors and the lighting is harsh.
The backgrounds here are blacks and whites.
It's hard to tell if the events of the trailer are literal
or if this is a liminal space
and the knight represents something.
I like the red on the inside of her dress and boots too.
It really pops out and makes the whole visual design work.
They've really committed to making the character one color
but giving them just enough of other stuff
that it stands out even more.
Weiss's singing is done by Casey Lee Williams,
Jeff Williams's daughter, who was 15 at the time.
Casey's clearly pretty talented so it works.
Weiss wins and it fades back to her singing
for the audience but the wound she got in the fight
fades to a scar.
Did she get it in this fight or from something else?
Ooh, mysterious.
The black trailer introduces us to...
writing and voice acting.
Blake, it's time.
I'm sorry, what? I'll turn that up for you.
Blake, it's time.
Oh, God, I shouldn't have turned it up.
They anime ninja run over to catch a train
snaking through this beautifully designed red forest.
Inside the train is a cool fight with evil robots.
Yeah! The fight's pretty good.
Blake's weapon is a sword whose holster
is another bigger sword
and they're connected by a string or something.
Also, it can turn into a gun.
Uh, it looks neat but I couldn't tell you
exactly what it does.
I like it though.
The music in this trailer has lyrics too
sung again by Casey Lee Williams.
The singing is, well, this time she's being pushed
to sing aggressive anime fight music.
♪ A boy with a knife and a chain ♪
♪ A boy with torture and a pain ♪
♪ A boy with ridicule and hate ♪
Oh! The fight is cool though.
I don't think it's as cool as the red trailer
because it's set in or on a train
so the fight sequences are in a rectangular box
or basically just a straight line.
It's hard to have creative movements
and camera work in that setup.
It's a bit of a limitation.
Halfway through, we get the first proper story beat
of our whole show.
Perfect.
Ugh, I'll set the charges.
What about the crew members?
What about them?
Oh, I think he might be a bad guy.
This is the beginning of a writing problem
which starts here and continues to plague the show
until, uh, actually it hasn't stopped yet.
When you have a character straight up say,
I don't care about killing civilians,
to someone's face, what you're doing
is having a character openly admit
they've been written to be the bad guy
and that's incredibly weird because they've written
monsters into the setting that are just generically evil
and want to destroy humanity because that's in their nature
so it's very weird that the actual characters
that you wrote behave like that too.
Anyway, they get attacked by a robot
and the guy cuts it apart in a genuinely really cool shot
but then he gets to the front of the car
and Blake says goodbye and cuts the car free,
leaving him behind, obviously having a problem
with his being okay with killing innocent people
and I guess this is the first time
she's noticed this about him
and as she disappears into the distance
and the colors really beautifully fade away
so she's alone in a void
and we're given a meaningful impression
of her emotional state,
the audience is struck with one lingering thought.
He can make that jump.
In the yellow trailer, we're introduced to Yang,
a character based on Goldilocks
so we have Red Riding Hood, Snow White, Goldilocks
and, uh, this one isn't really clear yet
but trust me, we'll get to it.
It's...we'll get to it.
Yang goes to a bar whose soundtrack
is a remix of the theme from the red trailer.
["Red Riding Hood Theme"]
It's neat. She beats up the manager
over whether he's seen someone in a picture
and she's written like two adult men
who've never written anything professionally before
except for Red vs. Blue trying to write a teenage girl.
Weirdly specific impression there.
Oh, Junior, I was just playing with you.
Don't be so sensitive.
Come on. Let's kiss and make up, okay?
But after two minutes, she punches the guy
and a fight starts and the trailer gets really good.
Her weapons are gloves that unfold into fist guns.
Yang's design and basic fighting style
seem very evocative of Tifa from Final Fantasy VII,
a character Monty previously liked to use a lot
in Dead Fantasy. It kind of makes sense
that some of the characters are designed around characters
he previously liked animating,
but now they're his own characters
that he has total control over.
Yang has three back-to-back cool fights
against a gang of guys who all dress like Jim Sterling,
two ladies who I guess are bodyguards or something,
and then against the guy she punched earlier.
She punches him with so much power
that the screen gets a Photoshop filter over it
and when she lands outside the bar,
Ruby is there.
Yang? Is that you?
Oh, no. Is that how she talked?
The writing and voice acting could do
with some refining and some of Jeff's musical decisions
could be dialed back just a little bit,
but basically these trailers are some of the coolest
possible trailers for a cartoon ever.
Like, if you showed me every trailer for every cartoon
and asked me which one I'd want to see at the end of that,
of course I'd pick Lunatics Unleashed.
I mean, seriously, this is fucking insane.
Why would anyone make this? I have to know!
But at a very close second, I'd pick this one.
Literally millions of people have gone back
to watch the red trailer again,
and looking at view figures, they've done that
instead of watching more of the actual show.
They're not just amazing teasers for a show.
They're just good.
It's so hard not to be on board
for the show these trailers are pointing to.
They imply a show that's going to be utterly,
fantastically tremendous.
But then it came out and it was bad.
["Lunatics Unleashed"]
Oh, you're still here. Right.
So Ruby isn't as simple as a bad show, is it?
It's a bad show which could have been something,
something truly amazing,
and that makes its problems infinitely more interesting
and important to explore,
and it's especially worth doing
because the show's creators do try
to be receptive to criticism.
Well, they try, but this manifests in a strange way
I'd like to discuss real quick.
The writers have talked on podcasts,
commentary tracks, panels, and so on
about the ways people have been shitty about the show
and how important it is to not be an asshole
when you're criticizing something.
People will make a comment.
Maybe it's, like, a criticism or something,
and you go, oh, okay, yeah, that's a fair critique,
but you don't want to listen to them
because of the way they said it,
which is something I think most people agree with.
It's really tough when you get a criticism
that you actually agree with
but you think was expressed
in an incredibly insensitive and rude way
because you never want to know
what the writer has to say about that.
That's not the way you get things.
It's just not.
I really get what he's saying here,
and, yeah, plenty of criticism of the show
is worthless dog shit.
For some reason, this show seems to attract people
who need excuses to yell at cartoon women,
but I'm having a hard time
finding more than one or two decent examples
of times they've really explored
actual criticisms of the show,
and the fact the show keeps making the same mistakes
implies they kinda don't.
I've seen the writers sometimes, quote,
retweet someone being shitty about the show
and responding to this behavior,
and, again, often what they're saying is correct.
If you have a point but you're an asshole about it,
no one will want to listen to you.
I basically agree completely with what Miles is saying here,
but he appears to spend a significant amount less time
responding to the kinds of criticism
he says he wants to see,
and there is good-faith criticism out there,
so stepping over them to point at bad-faith criticisms
and complain about how they're not helpful
means that, functionally, all you're doing
is rewarding shitty people with time and attention
you then don't spend engaging with the people
who make the decent criticisms of your work,
and as a lifelong fan of Rooster Teeth and Monty Oum,
I certainly hope it's clear that my criticism
comes from a well-meaning place.
I'm only here because I really thought
the show could have been great,
and I still think that maybe it could be.
Hey, see?
The chapel wasn't just here to be a reference
to that scene from Kingsman.
It was also a clever metaphor for my intent
to make a good-faith criticism.
Hey, come on. I thought it was clever.
Wait. Is that...
Is an intro playing now?
Hasn't it been, like, 20 minutes?
-♪ Deep down inside a voice cries ♪
♪ That tells you what's inside your heart ♪
♪ The world is frozen, you've been chosen ♪
♪ We must all now try to make a start ♪
♪ It's time for revolution, tear it all apart ♪
♪ So please tell me...
♪ Please tell me why each bomber guy's
♪ Disappointed by an anime
♪ Reach for the sky, each bomber guy's
♪ Gonna tell us why RWBY is lame
♪ Please tell me why each bomber guy's
♪ Disappointed by an anime
♪ Reach for the sky, each bomber guy's
♪ Gonna tell us why RWBY is lame
♪ RWBY, RWBY, RWBY, RWBY, RWBY sucks!
RWBY is about a girl who goes to anime warrior school
after getting invited
by the ominous and enigmatic headmaster,
Sephiroth Dumbledore,
and RWBY and her sister and new friends
mess about doing plot lines
that don't go anywhere for a few years
while the show decides what its story actually is.
Okay, wait, we're getting ahead of ourselves.
I wanted to start this video by doing the thing
all the smart video essayists are doing nowadays
where they sum up the plot of the thing they're analyzing
in a funny way that lays the groundwork
for future critique, but trying to delve into
and describe the deeper story problems
misses the surface problem
that there basically isn't one.
There's a really telling scene
at the end of the second season
where the main characters sit around
discussing the events of the show so far
and conclude that they don't really know
what's happening or why
and haven't figured anything out yet.
We didn't solve everything.
A lot of people were hurt,
and we still don't even know why they did this
or who that mystery girl was.
The show attempts to justify this, though.
Not every story has an eaten tidy ending.
Stories don't have to make sense or go anywhere.
Now, to a certain extent, this is an okay point to make.
Like, in real life, things don't have arcs
or necessarily lead anywhere,
but if 28 episodes into your story,
you're ending a season on a character
giving what amounts to a justification
for the story not mattering,
maybe the plot could have done with some more work.
The dog mimicking Yang is really cute, though,
so at least there's that.
Uh, time for bed?
Oh, please. Absolutely. Yes.
This is the season two finale.
We don't know what the story is.
Nap time.
Almost all of our main characters
don't find out what the actual story that's going on
actually is until about halfway through season four
where someone tells them while sitting around a campfire.
Ruby's story is one of those stories
that I like to call theoretically interesting
where, like, if you read it on Wikipedia,
it would sound really cool,
and in the show, there are plenty of times
where the characters sit you down
and tell you what the story was,
and you go, oh, that's actually really interesting.
I wish I'd seen some of that,
but in the actual episodes of the show you get to see,
not much happens at all,
so to hone in on why the story ended up like this,
we're gonna have to explore how the show was made.
Monty Oum was the main creator of Ruby,
but it seems like he didn't do much of the writing himself.
In interviews, Monty and the rest of Rooster Teeth
have been up front that Monty's not that interested
in the writing part of making a show.
And we do stuff like writing characters
and storylines and stuff that he doesn't really,
I don't know if he's just not interested in it,
but he doesn't do it. He likes all the animation.
Monty was more of a visual storyteller
and seemed to prefer to have writers do the writing part,
which means the show has some other important creators,
Miles Luna and Kerry Shawcross.
Ruby is being, it's directed by Monty Oum,
uh, and then, uh, Monty, Kerry, and myself
are the lead writers for the show.
Kerry had done some editing and compositing work
on Red vs. Blue and Miles had done machinimating,
like the head bobbing to the recorded dialogue,
on season nine.
He then wrote 13 minutes worth of miniseries
and helped co-write season ten.
Fucking with Ruby was a lot of fun.
It was a lot of fun to make.
It was really scary because it was essentially
the first time that either of us had ever written anything.
Oh, I appear to have accidentally paused that clip.
Written anything.
On this scale. Yeah, on this scale.
On this scale, for sure, yeah.
There's a fourth really important team member
who often goes unmentioned even though he's in the credits
of Ruby from even the first trailer, Shane Neuville.
He was a close friend of Monty's
and the two collaborated quite a lot on stuff.
He'd worked with him on the animated parts
of Red vs. Blue.
Monty or Shane will choreograph fights
or whatever sequences.
And he's made some great stuff on his own.
Monty first came up with some of the basic concepts for Ruby
while eating in an IHOP with Shane.
He doesn't get credited very often for his role
in the making of the series,
but some of the best animated moments were made by him.
So Monty came up with the basic ideas
for Ruby's world and characters and story
and then brought on Kerry and Miles as writers
and Shane as another animator.
The kind of thing we want to deliberate on
and put more thought into is, like, the plot and character.
And that's the stuff that Miles and Kerry's
been helping me with.
So, like, um...
Monty, Kerry, and Miles appear to have worked together
to come up with a basic outline of the plot and setting,
but most importantly for Monty,
the action sequences that were going to happen
and when in the story they happened,
and then Monty, Shane, and maybe a few others
went off to start work on the action scenes,
in doing so crafting some of the most cool
and elaborate action sequences ever made.
Meanwhile, the writers and the rest of the animation team
put together the rest of the scenes.
Eventually the three of us all decided on
a few set rules and characters and, um,
story ideas that we wanted to stick to.
Monty's working on, like, action and, like,
the design and the look of the show
and he kind of had us go off and start writing,
uh, the first episode.
Yeah. This division of work does seem
to make sense on the surface.
However, something Miles is being nice
and not mentioning is that sometimes Monty
would just disappear and then come up with new characters,
story elements, and action sequences
which the writers would then suddenly have to make room for
in their script. More on that later,
but for now, generally speaking,
Monty and Shane did the fights,
Kerry and Miles wrote the words,
and another team of animators put together
the non-action scenes.
The three of us would have a lot of meetings
and collaborate on the show to the point where
I just started coming up with the broad strokes eventually
and they would work. They had pretty much written
the book or the bulk of the show.
So in Monty's own words,
the bulk of the show is written by these writers.
To a certain extent, it's a bit like
if Dead Fantasy was a full animated series
with writers hired to connect the dots
and explain and justify the fights that were happening.
So there's a lot of good places to start
when analyzing the show's writing process,
but the best place is probably
the very beginning of the show.
I know, right? I'm a genius.
The opening of RWBY really doesn't set up
the story too well, but it does set up
the writing problems we'll go on to see
throughout the story in a useful way.
RWBY begins with a very simplistic-looking
introductory animation explaining the basic setting
with the slight problem that it doesn't actually
do that at all.
All it actually says is there's man
and also dangerous monsters that want to eat them up
called Grimm, as in Grimm's fairy tales,
which is kind of cute, and then man discovered dust,
a magical substance, well, magical-ish.
We'll get to that later, which can be used
to defeat them in some vague way.
This power was appropriately named Dust.
Why is that an appropriate name?
Hang on.
Man born from dust was strong, wise, and resourceful.
Okay, so it's called Dust because we, like,
came from dust, man, and that's the intro.
You'd think they'd explain a little bit more
about the world itself or what the setting is like,
and as they zoom out on a world map,
you briefly see four castles, so what's going on there?
Are they countries? But before you can be told
anything more important than dust,
they evaporate and we transition
to the first real scene of the story.
The intro doesn't share information,
which might have been really good to know going in
so people aren't confused when it suddenly comes up later.
For example, there's a third species
separate from humans or Grimm called the Faunus
whose existence and treatment by humans
is supposedly one of the driving elements
of the entire plot.
The first time this plot element
or even what a Faunus is comes up
is about 11 episodes into the show.
It must be hard to be a Faunus.
Your first reaction to a core plot point is,
to be a what? What's that?
The Faunus are mentioned once at the end of episode one
on TV when a piece of concept art
briefly brings up something called the Faunus protests.
This Saturday's Faunus civil rights protest turned dark.
But before they can actually tell you what that is,
it cuts out and then they don't come up again
until near the end of the season,
so it's almost like a surprise when they come back up.
For another example, in RWBY's setting,
every character has a power called Assemblance,
an ability completely unique to them.
What Assemblance is or the fact they exist at all
or how this universe's version of magic even works
isn't mentioned in the slightest in the opening
where that might have been nice,
and the name Semblance isn't even said in the show
until episode four...teen.
Fourteen. Sorry, I stuttered.
The four kingdoms and their relationships
with each other and their fragile peace
barely comes up until that peace is fractured
in season three where you suddenly learn
as it's happening that this peace
was incredibly easy to fracture and was hanging by a thread.
Our kingdoms are at the brink of war.
Wait, what? Are they? What's happening?
These all would have been really useful to know
going into the story or at least should be
properly set up at some point and not just dumped on you
the instant they become relevant,
but instead basic aspects of the setting
start to feel almost like twists
when they suddenly come up multiple hours in
with no groundwork laid for you whatsoever,
and the main opportunity to set some of this stuff up
and get the audience on the same narrative page,
the intro, gets thrown away
to give you a commercial for dust.
Why? Well, the first scene in the show
is the main villain of the first season
robbing a dust store and Ruby fighting them.
Now, in abstract, this opening scene itself
is a fine idea.
It's a very common and punchy way to start a story,
have a crime happen and the main character stopping it.
It's immediately engaging.
It draws the viewer in with action and stakes,
and it's a strong way of establishing
the primary hero and villain of a story.
Now, they could be robbing a bank or a convenience store
or a gas station or a jewelry store
or an analog for these things
that's appropriate to the setting,
but the decision was made to have it be a dust store,
and this is a decent choice too.
It's an important thing within the setting.
However, this does pose a problem for your audience
because now you're opening on the attempted theft
of a fantasy resource which has no point
of easy comparison to anything in real life.
You know how everyone knows what the One Ring is
because it's a ring that has evil magical properties
so you kind of get it?
Not quite as many people engaged
with the Silmarils, did they?
God, even admitting I know what that is embarrasses me.
If you just opened on this robbery without the intro,
people would get the gist of robbery
and girl stopping them,
but not what dust is or what it does
or why it's so important,
but you kind of have to start with the dust store
because it's a unique place for the setting
which could be interesting if it's pulled off well,
and the plan of the main villain for this season
is that he's stealing all the dust from everywhere,
so it's economically good storytelling
to open on one of those attempted thefts,
so in order for everyone to know what dust is
and why it's important,
the intro animation for the entire series
was either written or rewritten
to primarily focus on explaining dust
which is a tremendously poor idea
because now nothing else is explained.
When it comes down to it,
there's stuff much more important
to set up in the story
than some guy robbing a store.
Compounding this is that the plot
of the entire first season is this bad guy,
Clockwork Orange Man,
is trying to steal dust.
Why? Well, you'll find out in season never
because they dropped that plot point.
I'm not even kidding.
They changed their mind about the plot,
so none of this matters.
So yeah, on top of the obviously quite large problem
that the writers didn't know what their story
was going to be until after they'd finished
writing a season of it,
the chance to set up and explain the wider setting
so people know a little more is squandered
in order to explain why the next scene in the show
is supposed to be important
and then it turns out not to be anyway.
This is the opposite of economical storytelling.
This is...expensive storytelling.
This jumbled mess of ideas,
plot decisions, intro priorities,
and later changes makes the intro feel
like a first draft that they couldn't change.
In the commentary track, they talk a lot about
how cool it was that they got the voice actress
for Cortana from Halo to do the opening voiceover
and it seems like she might have had a pretty busy schedule,
so I have the sinking feeling that they wrote the intro
and then recorded it and then realized
that maybe it could have done with some more work
and it was too late.
That's, that's just my speculation there though,
but this stuff needs to be the strongest
because it's the best chance you have
to sell an audience on your setting and story.
The only thing really holding up its end here
is Monty's fight with the robbers,
which is really good, and also the transition
to the fight from the scene in the store
employs a really cool technique I love
called shifting diegesis because you think
that you're just hearing the music
but it's actually playing on Ruby's headphones.
["I'm the one who's gonna get it"]
["I'm the one who's gonna get it"]
That and the fight are really cool
and because of the intro not being super great,
I think it's the only thing that really hooks people in
in the first few minutes.
No one's watching the intro and going,
oh, wow, dust sold.
The show ends up having a lot of interesting ideas,
but those ideas are executed on and explained to you
extremely poorly in a way that really lets the show down.
I'm gonna say this right now.
Ruby's story gets interesting.
Ruby is a really fun show to write a wiki about.
There's some great stuff in there over the years,
but the story telling only gets worse
and the setting is one of the most poorly communicated
the world had ever seen before Bright came out.
Let's talk about world building and more importantly
how you convey that world to the viewer.
A thing lots of good fiction stories
for young adults try to do is craft a story
where you learn how things work
without being explicitly told.
The setting of, say, Avatar
to pick a completely random example
doesn't tell you exactly how everything works
because this world is normal to the people living in it
so no one would need to stop and ask what's going on.
Sometimes you meet people who can throw fire at you
and that's just not that surprising.
There's a nation full of people who can do that
and hey, you probably have a relative
who can throw rocks without touching them.
That's life, man.
So for the sake of the audience,
the story is written so the unique aspects of the world
come up in ways where the audience
learns how things work.
It's waterbending and it's...
Yeah, yeah, an ancient art unique to our culture,
blah, blah, blah.
This example from the first episode
is a little clumsy and obvious
compared to the rest of the show,
but it's really solid exposition
especially for a show that children might be watching.
You now know what waterbending is
and that it's unique to a culture
and that this is all so normal in this world
that even teenagers are casually dismissive
about this information and you learn all of this
without even feeling like you're being told.
You think you're just watching two siblings
arguing about how to catch a fish,
you fucking idiot, but you're secretly having
the main concepts of the world explained to you.
It's clever. Katara's trying to catch a fish
with waterbending, but in real life,
the viewer is the fish out of water.
Ha ha ha. Who let you in here?
I once heard someone smarter than me
calling this naturalistic storytelling.
The story never condescends to its audience
by pausing to tell you how the world works.
Instead, it just tells the story
in a way that makes it easier to understand how it works,
but if you're a talentless hack,
there are other ways of writing exposition.
In, say, Harry Potter,
Harry is a person from our world
learning about a much more magical one
hidden behind his own,
so the viewer is told how some things work
by way of Harry learning
because Harry doesn't know and needs to be told,
so we get scenes where people tell Harry
how the world works.
Now, I personally think it's better
to discover things without having a character
just be told, but a lot of Harry Potter
takes place at a school,
so almost all interesting storytelling
is kept to a minimum.
Harry Potter isn't as good as when you read it as a child.
The hottest take of 2014.
The exposition in RWBY is, well,
there's a character in the story called Jaune.
Jaune Ark. Do you get it?
Who inexplicably doesn't know basic elements
of the setting he lives in,
and at several points early in the story,
another character takes him aside
to tell him how things work.
Do you know what aura is?
For example, in an early scene,
this character, Pyrrha, explains aura to him.
She gives a long speech about how aura
is a manifestation of your spiritual energy,
nay, your soul.
Basically, you have a shield for a while in fights
like in Halo. I guess old habits die hard.
Aura is the manifestation of our soul.
It bears our burdens and shields our heart.
Have you ever felt like you were being watched?
Our aura can be our shield.
Everyone has it, even anima.
The monsters we fight lack a soul.
Creatures' manifestation, they are the darkness.
It's not about understanding.
So start by wearing light.
Just manifest our aura.
Get it with everyone.
It's like a force field!
Okay, Miles, Kerry,
you just made your whole audience
sit through that exposition.
You can't then make a joke about how simple
the explanation could have been.
Also, when you're doing exposition,
you still have to think about the character
who's saying it and why.
You know, Pyrrha's a teenager.
Young adults don't tend to walk around
with entire speeches about how their world works
prepared in case someone asks.
That's just really strange characterization.
It's also really strange writing-wise
for Jaune to not know this.
Jaune is the latest in a long line
of heroic monster hunters and is in anime warrior school
because he wants to live up to this legacy.
My father, my grandfather, and his father before him
were all warriors.
They were all heroes.
I wanted to be one too.
There's no way he didn't, at some point,
pick up this concept growing up or in training
or, you know, it is a core aspect
of, like, life in this world.
Jaune's character not knowing is such poor characterization
that it literally doesn't make sense.
You know, in Harry Potter, Harry was a literal child
who was deliberately sheltered from magic all his life,
so his not knowing stuff was explained by the story.
That's kind of the only way this expository style works.
You have to incorporate them not knowing
into the character or it doesn't make sense.
If you want to explain one of the world's mechanics,
it's not great to do it by having a character
whose whole life revolves around knowing this information,
not know it, and for the first person he ever asks about it
to happen to have a speech prepared.
Jaune's idiocy is often used to try to make hilarious jokes
about man not know thing.
There's no way I put my gear in locker 636 yesterday.
I would have remembered having to count that high.
Ha ha ha ha ha.
But more than for a joke, it's also a vehicle
for someone to have an excuse to give
really straightforward sounding exposition for the audience.
In the scene where Jaune first meets Pyrrha,
Weiss tells him who Pyrrha is.
This is Pyrrha. Hello again.
Pyrrha graduated top of her class at Sanctum.
Never heard of it.
Do you know who Pyrrha is?
Let me tell you and also the viewer who she is
and list some of her accomplishments.
She's won the Mistral Regional Tournaments
four years in a row.
A new record. The what?
It's not just that Jaune's characterization suffers
from him being written to be literally born yesterday.
It's that everyone else's characterization suffers too
when they essentially have to pause being their own characters
in order to explain the story to someone.
Pyrrha, in my opinion, is one of the most interesting characters
in the show, but so much of the time she could have spent,
like, being interesting or doing something interesting
is spent obsessed with teaching Jaune everything
he needs to know and how to fight.
I've seen people call this show progressive and feminist
because it has a lot of female main characters,
but looking at how they're written,
I don't think I can agree there.
This strong female character is basically immediately reduced
to doing all of the emotional and physical labor
for this guy. A huge portion of the early show's
screen time is dedicated not to the main characters of Ruby,
who the show is named for, but to Jaune,
the real main character getting trained and explained to
and flirted with by Pyrrha, the coolest girl in school.
Incidentally, Jaune is voiced by Miles Luna,
the lead writer of the show.
Hey, Pyrrha.
What's up, girl? How you doing?
She's so pretty.
She's so pretty.
She's so pretty.
So even while having a comic relief character
who doesn't know things he definitely would
so people can explain it to him,
the show is still struggling for good opportunities
to explain the setting and plot.
Luckily for exposition's sake, but not the viewers,
they have, like Harry Potter, set a majority
of the early show in a school so often the viewer
is in a literal classroom being lectured to
and no, it doesn't become fun when the characters
in the scene are bored of it too.
However, because they're trying to make
the exposition naturalistic, you're also expected
to immediately grasp multiple abstract concepts
that aren't explained at all.
Take, for example, semblances.
What's a semblance?
Okay, well, they're not magic.
Something the show is very careful to explain
is that they're not magic because people don't think
magic is real in this setting.
We have dust semblances, but I mean,
there's no such thing as magic.
To them, semblances are normal and magic
would be really weird, but just for my own entertainment,
three of the things I just showed you were semblances
and one of them was magic.
Good luck figuring out which is which
without being explicitly told by the story.
Every character in RWBY has one really unique special ability.
Blake can leave shadow clones behind
and use dust to augment their elemental abilities.
Uh, Yang can go Super Saiyan
and get more powerful when she's angry,
but then later they re-explain that it's her getting stronger
as she gets hurt more, like she channels the damage.
With each hit, she gets stronger
and she uses that energy to fight back.
Then later they change it again
to how it is her getting angry.
Her father calls it basically a temper tantrum.
Basically a temper tantrum.
Oh, and then they change it back again in volume six.
His semblance is like yours.
He absorbs energy through his sword,
stores it up, and then sends it back when he's ready.
So if you're confused about how the main character's
semblances actually work, it's okay.
So were the writers.
This isn't just me nitpicking.
This lack of internal logic
when it comes to something even as simple
as one of our four main character's abilities
makes the show very confusing to watch.
When you're watching Yang fighting,
you don't know whether to feel if she's actually in trouble
or if she's waiting to unleash her power,
and that means it's kind of hard to ever really know
what level of danger one of your main characters is in,
and that really sucks.
Oh, also another expository problem
is in this scene too.
A guy who can move this quickly
is currently fighting Yang.
He's just off screen while this is happening.
Did he stop so Blake can tell Yang his semblance?
Is he just waiting for the exposition to finish?
Listen, guys, I'm not trying to be mean,
but, like, show one other person your script
before you're done.
Like, just show it to one person.
Ruby's power is she can move really quickly
and turns into a weird orb made of cloth
and rose petals as she does it.
Weiss can make symbols appear that either lock things
in place or stick people to things,
but also she can summon monsters?
But this isn't magic. It's not magic.
Glinda Goodwitch, yeah, really clever,
can, well, she can basically do magic,
like control things and shoot energy
and put broken things back together
and instantly kill monsters, but it's not magic,
and Pyrrha is basically Magnet Man from the X-Men,
so this is a totally cool thing
to put in your fantasy setting.
It's very shounen anime.
It really fits. It's a fine idea.
So how is this explained to you by the story?
Well, uh, they don't.
The intro doesn't mention it along with most things,
and for the vast majority of the first season,
it's not mentioned at all.
You see some crazy magical-looking stuff
happening, and you assume based on people's reactions
that some people can do magic in this world,
and that's fine, but then 14 episodes into the show,
Pyrrha saves Jaune's life by manipulating his shield
from afar with her Magnet Man powers,
which we didn't know she had until this moment either,
by the way, and all the other characters react to this
as if it's a crazy unique thing.
Uh, what?
Despite tons of magical shit happening before that
and one of the people in this scene
surprised by Pyrrha's power can seemingly also do magic,
and they have this conversation about it.
How did you?
Well, Ruby has her speed.
You have your glyphs.
My semblance is polarity.
This is the first time in the show
anyone has mentioned semblances.
This just happens.
Nobody watching the show knows what that word means yet.
So then, bam, right as you're maybe getting to grips
with everything else you've been told,
brushed up on your in-show Ruby 101 classes,
it turns out fundamental things you thought you knew
about the setting, like that there's magic
and that's fine, were lies,
and actually every single character in the world
has one unique thing they can do with its own special name
that is explicitly not the same thing as magic,
but just to fuck with you,
magic does also exist in addition to all this.
The idea's completely fine,
but this is not how you convey it to an audience.
This scene is supposed to be about
Jaune's personal growth as a character,
but instead, first-time viewers are gonna be going,
hang on, what's a semblance?
I thought people could just do magic.
Imagine if the first time anyone said bending
in Avatar the Last Airbender was 14 episodes in,
but in addition, Pyrrha also specifically
is keeping her semblance a secret.
We gotta tell them what happened!
We could...
or perhaps we could just keep it our little secret.
She doesn't broadcast her power,
so it puts her opponents at a disadvantage.
But then later when some other characters
figure out what her power is,
they call it by the same name.
Her semblance is polarity.
So it's a secret, but everyone knows
the specific name of Pyrrha's ability
without needing to be told it once they see her do it.
What I'm trying to say is semblance is a kind
of a semi-complicated concept to just drop on people.
They don't have to be.
There are tons of shows and anime
where every character has a unique ability of some sort.
There's this great narrative technique
that a lot of anime utilizes nowadays
where they explain what is happening in them.
In JoJo's Bizarre Adventure,
almost every main character has a power called a stand,
but the way they introduce it is they have a character
getting confused by these weird powers he has
and then two other characters turn up
to explain what a stand is to him so he gets it,
thus helping to ensure that you also know how stands work
so that the audience knows what's happening in the story.
So, yeah, it's not like every character
having a power is a bad story idea,
but semblances are specifically made stranger
by either the lack of exposition
or the presence of incredibly confusing exposition.
Like in volume five, they explain what semblances are
to another character, presumably because they realized
the audience had never been actually told
what semblances were in the show for five seasons.
Can you see the problem here?
When these ideas and story components
are being explained so strangely
and it's taking seasons to correct,
eventually the viewer either stops watching
or stops caring about really understanding what's going on.
They start to treat it like it's not really worth their time
and tune it out while they wait for the next cool fight.
Good exposition and proper conveyance of information
are so important in stories, especially fantasy stories.
If you do it in a boring way or do it badly
or don't do it at all or explain only one thing
in the introduction of your whole series
and then it turns out not to be as big a plot point
as you'd thought, the audience's experience
of your potentially good story is damaged
and it's really hard to get that goodwill back
when you've lost it.
I'm only realizing now,
writing this video,
exactly how cool Ruby's story could have been
if it was written in a way that wasn't such a struggle
to get to grips with.
The show is having such a problem
conveying its world that you have to watch
another different show to learn basic shit.
Despite spending tons of time sitting you down
telling you how the world works,
they still don't manage to tell you enough
about the setting for you to be able to understand it,
so they made a second companion show
consisting entirely of lectures
called, Ruby, World of Remnant.
Everyone's favorite part of watching a cartoon.
The homework, like what all the countries are
and how they work,
how Huntsman Academies work,
and the basic history of the world
along with the major mechanics of the show
like what Grimm actually are,
what Faunus are,
how Aura works,
what Assemblance is.
Oh, and how could we forget
the cross-continental transmit system?
The creators seem to have realized
that this isn't explained very well
in the story that they wrote,
so they essentially made a private personal Wikipedia
to tell you what was happening.
In the commentary track for volume two,
they basically admit that World of Remnant exists
to patch up all of these holes.
We have the World of Remnant videos
to kind of get, uh, some exposition across,
um, as best we could.
As best we could?
Guys, no one was forcing you to write the story badly.
They're even animated in the same style as the intro,
effectively admitting the actual introduction
didn't explain anything.
If you watch through Ruby on Crunchyroll,
which, uh, why?
The World of Remnant episodes
are scattered between the normal ones.
They're genuinely telling you that the best way
to experience Ruby is for the show
to stop every now and then
so that you can be told a few minutes
of straight exposition.
The World of Remnant is a dangerous place.
It especially doesn't help that the explanations
in World of Remnant aren't very good either.
The World of Remnant episode about Grimm
explains that we don't really know much about Grimm.
Scientists perpetually find themselves
with more questions than answers.
Little else is known about the creatures of Grimm.
Great. Thanks.
The World of Remnant episode on Semblances
tells us that every single Semblance
is completely unique.
The Wielder Semblance is completely unique.
But then it turns out that Weiss's Semblance
isn't unique and the Schnee family
have the exact same Semblances
like it's in their blood or something
and her sister Winter can do the same things as her.
Every Schnee has the ability to summon.
We have for generations.
So they're unique except when they're not.
I'm glad there's a video explaining how this works,
but it would also help if the explanation made sense
and if it didn't just raise more questions also.
We Schnees are unique.
Unlike many, our Semblance is hereditary.
Winter is telling this piece of information to her sister.
She's one of the only other people
who already knows this.
This isn't how you write exposition!
I don't want to be down on the concepts themselves here.
The idea of Semblances and the idea of someone
keeping their Semblance a secret to have an advantage
or a Semblance that runs in the bloodline of a family
and gives one of our leads a reputation to live up to
are all decent things to put in a story
and they could all potentially be really interesting,
but for those things to be interesting,
they have to be actually conveyed well
and then used well in the story itself.
A good idea isn't enough.
The World of Remnant episode about the Schnee Dust Company
largely covers the life and times
of a really interesting-sounding character
who we never see in the show
and who never actually comes up by name ever.
They just invented a cool guy and made up a story about him.
You don't get story points because an idea sounded good.
In fact, it just means you lose more points by wasting it.
If you do watch all of RWBY and do enough research
and ask around on the Reddit but only once you've consulted
the wiki and watched World of Remnant,
you might finally know what the story of RWBY
was supposed to be and understand how cool
so many aspects of the plot sound in the abstract,
but you probably won't have had a good time.
You can't just tell me how good the story
or concepts might be in a side cartoon.
You have to tell me a good story.
If you try to get someone new into RWBY,
pay attention to how much you have to explain things
on the show's behalf.
Even if you like the show and think it's good
or at least gets good, thinking critically,
we have to acknowledge that it certainly takes
some getting there.
It's especially disappointing when sometimes
you can see the show setting things up quite well.
When RWBY gets done beating up the Sterling squad,
the bad guy manages to get away in a ship
even though a new lady turns up to help RWBY stop him.
I bring this up because, credit where it's due,
there is some pretty good storytelling going on here.
When this new character turns up and is wrecking shop,
Malcolm McDowellboy says...
["We got a huntress!"
And this is a really good line
because the audience is like,
that sounds neat. What's that?
I bet they're important, and then right after,
RWBY reacts like meeting a huntress is really cool.
["You're a huntress.
Can I have your autograph?"
This is a decently animated scene
but also good exposition,
especially compared to the rest of the show.
We know that hunters are a big deal
without having to be directly told
who they are or what they do,
based purely on seeing a guy react
in a kind of panic to her appearance
and how RWBY reacts herself.
It's fun and cool and doesn't bog you down
with explicit explanations,
so the writing in this sequence specifically really works.
That said, you fully learn what huntsmen
and huntresses are by sitting in a classroom
while they make a point about how this is boring
and the other characters aren't paying attention.
["Individuals who have sworn to protect
those who cannot protect themselves."
Oh, really? Wow, thanks.
This scene was worth my time.
Surely there's a more interesting way
to explain things to your audience
than with a lecture.
Besides, that's what World of Remnants'
huntsman episode is for.
What this scene with Glinda implies to me
is that someone on the writing team
did know how to write exposition
and his name was Monty Oum.
The action scenes, the ones Monty had gone off to make
while the writers wrote the other stuff,
are consistently the most interesting examples
of character writing and storytelling in the show.
In volume two, our characters are so busy
having drama or doing wacky skits
to establish why these characters are actually friends.
Did you steal my binder?
I am not a crook.
What are you talking about?
You said a dog?
And a male?
But a few episodes in, we have this big fight
where the team work together to beat a big mecha,
and in this scene, Monty does all the characterization
that could have happened in the show.
The characters' team work,
using each other's abilities in conjunction together,
is choreographed and prepared in a way
that shows the audience that these characters
have learned to work together.
Each move even gets called for by Ruby using a code word.
Freezer burn!
Checkmate!
Ladybug!
Blastoise!
We have to slow it down!
And how do you propose we do that?
Ice flowers!
Showing that she's grown and learned
to direct the team she's leading.
The audience can finally tell that these characters
have a really intimate knowledge of each other
and their skills.
These names were actually chosen by Monty
as a reference to the ship names
the fandom had come up with for the characters.
What's a ship?
Uh.
Sorry, that wasn't meant to signify
my feelings on the subject.
Well, a ship is a thing fan discussions of media
end up doing when fans want or predict characters
to end up in a relationship together.
Sometimes creators make subtle nods
to these communities in their work,
like in Steven Universe.
That one time they had a literal ship
with two characters on it.
Referencing the ship names is a little bit creepy.
Ruby is, like, 15, you know?
Ruby Rose is a 15-year-old girl.
But at least let's take careful note
of how Ruby and Yang are the only pair
that don't do a team attack here
because that would mean acknowledging
the part of your fandom that came up with a ship name
for two half-siblings, which is fucking disgusting.
In addition to being a really cool Monty fight,
we're seeing our main characters in action as a group
and learning about how they've grown together
between seasons.
Would have been nice to see them grow
in the actual show, but credit where it's due.
It's well-conveyed exposition.
You might not even notice you're learning
about the characters because you're watching them
beat up a giant robot.
It's a good scene.
Like, that's the thing about early Ruby.
It'll just keep inexplicably having good scenes
that are either super fun to watch
or work way better story-wise than anything around them,
and usually it's the action sequences
which somehow manage to outright the writing
of the scenes the writers came up with.
Here's another example.
As we've mentioned, the bad guys
finding out Pyrrha's semblance is a big deal,
but since this discovery is made during a fight,
it's done really well using animation and artistry.
Mercury has a sparring match with Pyrrha
and the action is shot to focus specifically
on the attention Mercury is paying
to how she moves and fights,
like he's trying to figure her out.
Then when she tries to stealthily use her semblance
to avoid one of his attacks, he notices what she's doing.
It was actually animated by Shane Neuville
whose grasp of using animation
to tell a story is really good.
In the director's commentary track for this scene,
the whole team can't not gush about the work he does.
Was this Shane? This is all Shane.
Yeah. This is all Shane layering
in that tiny little stuff where it's like
he got the tone of the fight.
He knew what this was about. Yeah, man.
The way they were able to read each other
and the movements. Barring the kicks
and flips and everything, it's just there's so much
going on, like, in the performance.
It's like a silent dialogue scene.
Oh, my god. I love this.
We're looking at their faces
and seeing them examine things.
It's a really strongly characterized scene
Also, I got that reference.
Good one, Shane. Compare and contrast
with when the bad guys actually discuss Pyrrha's power
and they're just sitting around going,
oh, she can control magnets.
It's called polarity which I also know somehow.
Like, it's so weird that really well-told scenes
are right next to this.
Scenes made by Monty and Shane feel like pieces
of a much better or at least better told show
trapped next to this stuff and outside of the fights,
the animation is, well...
Cut it out!
I'm gonna get him!
Oh!
Come on!
We have big plans for you, Roman.
The fuck? Is that just fucking concept art?
If you want to really unproductively hate Ruby
all day forever, you know, if for some reason
you've decided it's your job to be angry
and sad all your life, there's tons of animation problems
or ugly sequences or shots to poke fun at
but talking about them in this video
seems like a distraction because the show looking perfect
wouldn't fix its core writing and storytelling problems
and I've enjoyed much worse looking shows
because they told a better story.
The biggest problem with the show isn't the animation
surrounding these fights.
It's the story surrounding these fights.
It's the way these fights are being connected
or rather not connected by the writing.
A useful thing to know is that while working
on Red vs. Blue, the script would have gaps in it
marked Monty action sequence here.
I would then find places in that script,
places within between the lines in that table read
and start inserting my sequences in the parts
where Bernie's script would say
Monty action sequence here.
Red vs. Blue had a script but how exactly
the fights looked was entirely up to Monty
since he was the best at deciding that stuff.
While the rest of the show was being made
in the traditional machinima style
in the Halo games themselves, Monty was making
the best possible fight he could and these pieces
of the show joined together at the end of this process
pretty organically.
Early RWBY was made using a fairly similar principle.
The three main creators had agreed on the story
in the broad strokes and then Monty was doing
the fights in the same way but with the writers
actually writing out the plot they'd agreed upon
while Monty was making the action sequences.
To give an example, the first fight takes place
in a street environment so they wrote the dust store robbery
and then as quickly as possible moved the events outside
to connect with the street fight and then up to the rooftops
to connect to another Monty fight.
You can see this in the version of the show
on the DVD extras where they show episode one
with the storyboards.
Everything the main crew were working on
had been written and had storyboards
so the animators knew what visuals to go for
and then when Monty's cool fights are happening,
the storyboard is just a black card that reads
Monty action and given what his fights were like,
three exclamation marks is appropriate.
The we got a Huntress part I praised earlier
was also a Monty action sequence on the storyboard
so it's likely Monty came up with the idea
to have Torchwick say words to this effect
and not the writers whose best idea
for conveying what a Huntress is
is to have a professor tell our Huntresses in training
in a classroom as if they've never been told before
even though they're going to a school for Huntresses
and then to write a side cartoon telling you again.
In another good example when the characters
are being tested in the woods,
the characters all get their individual plot lines
and then when it's time for the big Monty fight
designed to happen at this point in the story,
we get this insert shot of the characters running
to the specific location where Monty's fight was done.
Now this is one of the standout action sequences
of Monty's career. It's really good.
It's one of my favorite animated sequences
in basically anything. It's just great
but really disappointingly due to some strange writing choices,
it doesn't actually connect to the story
that was just happening because the gang's plan
at this point was to run away
from the big monsters attacking them.
There's no point in fighting these things.
Run and live.
That is an idea I can get behind.
But as soon as Monty fight mode begins,
it's like they were leading them here
to have a proper place to fight them.
I'm assuming Monty and the writers had decided
on this fight in a very broad way
like during the trial the gang fights some giant monsters
and it's really cool and Monty made this fight
thinking the writers would come up with an explanation
but the explanation ended up being,
let's run away.
There's no point in fighting these things.
Ah, I don't know how to make this clear enough.
That is the one thing that you do not write
immediately before cutting to a fight against them
and the worst part is this is probably
the most seamless connection between the story
and action the show manages to do
because you can at least, like, assume
that their means of escape got cut off
or they got too close and they had to fight
but when they have several characters agree to run away
and they say they're going to run away,
having them just kind of stop, it's very strange.
Another really strange thing you start to notice
when you try and keep track of how the fights
are being connected is that character arcs seem to start
and then suddenly stop on a whim.
When the characters get sorted into teams,
Ruby is made the leader of Team Ruby
and this annoys Weiss who thinks Ruby isn't very smart
or good and who she argued with a lot during the test
but then during the test, Weiss decided to be nicer?
I'll be...nicer.
But she's mad again now because she wanted to be the leader.
This seems like it's going to set up
interesting character tensions,
maybe a developing friendship
with emotional speed bumps along the way
but it's resolved instantly when Weiss complains
to a professor and they say,
That's preposterous.
And Weiss decides to be nice.
I am going to be the best teammate you will ever have.
I'll be...nicer.
Problem solved.
Writing!
Like, all Weiss needed was for a man in a position
of authority to give her a good telling off.
Your exceptional skill on the battlefield
is matched only by your poor attitude.
Just so you know, Weiss' main character arc
is about her relationship with her abusive
and controlling father so the idea this is what she needed
is actually kind of gross.
Me, personally, I still don't see it as a big deal.
I'm just like, I don't see them as like,
these are four females that are awesome.
I'm like, no, these are just four cool kids that are fun.
Can't really think of any moment really
where we sat down and we're like, okay,
this is happening or we want this to happen
because they are female.
Yeah, no, it's always just been like,
it's just like, they're four people.
They're awkward teenagers.
Hey, hashtag RWBY fans.
Have you heard?
Yang Xiaolong is going to fight Tifa Lockhart.
My money's on the hot one.
All right, so we've got Yang Xiaolong.
She is the bubbly one on the bunch.
She's just so happy.
She's the party girl.
She's, you know, pretty much everything
everybody wants in a girl.
So they brought back the interesting character conflict
of the test then re-resolved it right away.
This is like watching a learner driver stall their car.
Like, come on, you almost got a story going.
Just, just keep going at it.
Immediately after having a character
just give up on what their character arc should have been,
the plot suddenly switches gears
and focuses on someone else.
Wait, gears?
And then it was the stall the car thing.
Was that a deliberate metaphor?
No, that was an accident. I'm sorry.
Thus begins the Xion arc.
A big portion of volume one,
four of the show's first 16 episodes,
is about how Xion actually forged
his anime college transcript to get into this school
which makes him the deepest character we've met so far.
Wow, who'd have thought?
And then he gets bullied by a generic mean guy
who threatens to tell people his secret
and get him kicked out,
but then he stands up to him
and saves him from a big grim,
and now he respects him so he won't share his secret.
That's the solution to bullying, kids.
Save them from a monster
and maybe they'll leave you alone
out of respect.
Xion finally asks Pyrrha for the help
she was offering him
instead of pointlessly refusing it,
and it becomes kind of clear
Pyrrha's working really hard on this guy
because she's into him for some reason.
This multi-episode break
from covering any of the main characters of RWBY?
You know, it's in the name.
To focus on one of the lead writer's characters
certainly seems strange,
but what makes the pace even stranger
is that once those episodes are done,
there are two episodes left
and they have to now connect the story
to this final fight scene in a shipyard starring,
and I can't stress this enough,
two characters who have not yet appeared in the show.
Oops!
So the next episode starts and, uh,
here's Sun. He's here now.
And then while chasing him,
the gang randomly runs into,
no, literally runs into Penny,
the other character who they forgot to put in earlier
because there was just nothing you could have cut
to establish these characters sooner.
This pure gold just has to stay in.
So now these characters are here just in time
for the climactic fight.
Sun's stick that turns into nunchucks
that are also guns is so fun to watch.
It's just amazing.
However, because of the frankly bizarre pacing
caused by the show's production,
I have barely any idea who most
of the characters involved even are,
which affects my engagement somewhat.
It's a really cool scene,
but it feels very disconnected
from the rest of the story.
Now, exactly how this problem got here
isn't something it feels fair to speculate about too hard.
I'm sure you could easily conclude that the three
agreed on a story and then the writers just messed up,
making the plot feel like a cohesive hole
with the action sequences, and writing-wise,
the show feels very idiosyncratic
and self-conscious, like it's looking for something
to spend its time doing before the next fight
and therefore misspending the time
that would have added context and character
to those fights until it's too late
to really do that stuff properly,
but at the same time, some behind-the-scenes material
and panels and stuff seem to imply that Monty went away
and then came back with new characters
and action sequences for them and dropped it
on Miles and Kerry with little to no notice.
However this disconnect got here,
it's not very good and relates
to some serious production problems.
Like, if your main creative leads aren't on the same page
about what's happening in the story,
the story's probably not gonna wind up very good,
and also the way a huge swath of the show
isn't about Team RWBY
and their plot line evaporates
to make way for the adventures of some guy,
the writers don't seem to be handling
the story they did know they were supposed to do
that well either.
It certainly doesn't make it look any better
that the guy is voiced by one of them.
Oh, and then in volume two,
they correct for this problem
by adding a second author insert?
Uh...
So a guy called Neptune turns up.
He's a really cool, attractive guy who wears goggles,
and they make a point of showing how wise
is into him, like, right away.
Let's not assume that this is, like, author insert
wish fulfillment or whatever.
Like, let's assume they just came up with this character
and then Kerry Shawcross decided to voice him.
Like, hey, if you're writing a whole show,
you should get to voice one of the characters.
That's fine.
But come on.
It was really weird that you picked Neptune, man.
This character gets into love triangle stuff
with a bunch of young female characters
who you write,
so it just feels weird,
and then this character hangs out a bunch with Yang.
You know.
Pretty much everything everybody wants in a girl.
Oh, what a woman.
Uh, she's 17, so...
And yeah, in volume two, the plot pauses itself
for a shockingly long amount of time
to have an arc where our characters prepare
for the school prom and figure out who's inviting who
because Weiss wants to go with Neptune
but Jaune wants to go with Weiss
but Pyrrha wants to go with Jaune
and she can't bring herself to ask it,
so whenever something in the show happens
that's really strangely explained
and you wish got, like, told to you better,
remember that they had time to do it
and spent it writing scenes
where the two characters voiced by them
hang out at a prom.
Hey, guys, you know when you were talking
about needing to get exposition across as best you could?
Put it here.
Put naturalistic exposition in the scenes
where this fucking prom would have gone.
The prom stuff isn't even necessarily bad either.
It's nice seeing the sweet dance animations
Monty did for it.
He was a big fan of animating dancing along with fights
and it's cool seeing this stuff in RWBY too
and a lot of the character and relationship stuff
happening in the prom scenes is, like, fine.
The problem with the scene is even if it's perfect,
it's yet another thing that's happening
instead of a story.
It just becomes aggravating knowing
you're watching all of this and basically still waiting
for the plot to start again,
and you know how it starts again?
Well, right at the end of the episode
before the final two of the season,
the ground suddenly opens up under Ruby's feet
and she falls into the plot.
Watching this show knowing that it had a creative lead
and two writers and the plot consisted
of a bunch of people fucking about going to the prom
and not doing much else for most of the season?
Like, seriously, what were you doing?
It turns out there's an entire dead
underground civilization the bad guy
and his goons are doing an evil plan in
but the next fights that Monty was making
were a series of fights on and in a train
riffing on the ideas he'd had during the black trailer
and those scenes are supposed to happen now
so the dead, destroyed civilization
that Ruby just fell into
has a working rail network with a train in it.
This is another instance of there's no point
in fighting these things.
Like, instead of the plot leading organically
into the fights on the train,
the train is just there
when it needs to be in the story.
I feel like there might have been a slightly easier way
of getting the characters onto a train.
That's all I'm saying, but once we get there,
the actual action sequences on the train
are really well done.
Monty and Shane and the rest of the team
do some really stellar work here.
Oh!
The Zwei scene from yesterday was Shane Neuville's idea.
Blame him. Thank you, Shane.
That scene was amazing.
Oh, and thank you, Harley Dwartz
who Shane says helped.
This is the second best shot in the entire show ever
of all time.
Ha ha! Do you get it? Do you get it?
And I wish the writing and story had the kind of energy
the animators were capable of manifesting.
There is this one really cool fight
between Yang and Neo, a character fans love
because her deal is she doesn't talk
and therefore cannot be ruined by the writers.
She actually beats Yang,
and then a strange warrior woman
we don't know at all turns up to protect her,
and Neo is so fuck-off scared of whoever this lady is
that she's like, nope, peace out,
and then the lady leaves.
It's really cool and mysterious,
but there is one teeny issue with this scene,
and that's the really good music that plays during it.
♪
This is genuinely a pretty awesome track.
It really builds tension and mystery
for what's going on with this character
and what her deal is.
This track is also the best piece of music
that Jeff Williams didn't make.
Well, that's not fair to say. That's kind of mean,
but when I first heard this song,
I couldn't get it out of my head,
and I realized that I couldn't
because I'd heard it a bunch somewhere else before,
and then I remembered that I spent most of 2014
listening to the soundtrack to the Godzilla movie
that came out that year.
♪
They found the bones of the Godzilla soundtrack,
and they rebuilt him into Midi-Godzilla.
Now, I'm not saying this is plagiarism or anything.
These songs are just incredibly similar
because they're both very generic,
but I do kind of secretly hope that they got the idea
from the Godzilla movie because I love finding
other secret Godzilla fans out there.
Oh, Shin Godzilla was so good, wasn't it?
The train crashes into the city,
so a bunch of grim attack people.
♪
All our main characters work together
to beat up some monsters for a while.
Oh, look, a reference to Haloid,
which was itself a reference to the Matrix.
I love it.
It's a pretty good end to a volume, you know,
defending a city from a bunch of monsters.
Ah.
And then Team Coffee shows up.
Team Coffee, four characters
who've barely been on screen until this exact moment
and only get mentioned in passing like once,
appear and heroically single-handedly kill
almost all the grim in a matter of seconds.
I absolutely love the music for this fight.
♪
Uh, it's awful.
It's objectively a terrible song,
but I love it.
It's like if the Sonic Adventure soundtracks
vomited into my mouth and I want it.
This is the climactic action sequence
of the volume, by the way.
Monsters attack the city,
and four other characters turn up
and save the day.
That's the...that's the story!
Once again, a bunch of characters we barely know
are starring in the climactic fight
of a season of the show.
Who the hell is this guy?
What are his weapons?
Why does he look like that?
What is the point of having a story
if this is how it ends every season?
If I wanted context-free fighting,
I'd watch Dead Fantasy again.
The whole point of RWBY is that there were writers
helping make it something more than that,
connect the fights in an organic and meaningful way.
RWBY could have just been a collection
of fun fights uploaded on a YouTube channel,
and all it would have lost is several hours of baggage.
You just destroyed my favorite clothing store.
Oh, you can barely tell a man wrote this.
There's one particular strange moment in this scene
that really encapsulates the problems the writer...
the problems the writing is having.
Why do I write such long sentences?
This character, the bunny girl
who appeared very briefly in season one,
her name is Velvet.
She has a weird case that's got her weapon hidden in it,
and when she goes to use it in the fight,
her leader, who's a name I had to Google
because I don't think we're told it until the next season,
no, I'm not gonna tell you what it is,
says...
Hey, come on.
You spent all semester building that up.
Don't waste it here.
...and proceeds to do all the killing herself
with her cool minigun bag thing.
It's great.
This line is meant to be, like,
a funny nod to the audience, right?
Like, we've been building that up for ages.
Let's not waste it now.
It's meant to be a funny joke,
but the problem is that joke requires the setup
of us having seen that Velvet has a weapon
and wanting to find out what it is,
but because the story's writing has been so mismanaged,
Velvet has been on screen for literally seconds
in the show so far.
The clip of Velvet you're seeing right now,
this is her only appearance in volume two.
She just walked off screen, right?
She's gone. That's it.
See you in the climax.
So all we get is this scene of the group
leaving for a mission and another character
mentioning they sure have been away
on that mission for a while.
Team Coffee's away mission lasted longer than expected.
We don't know who this character is.
The joke about Velvet's weapon combined with her
and her team's sparse appearance in the show
despite saving the day at the end
is perhaps the clearest look
into the early show's production problems.
Was this scene planned in advance
and then the writers didn't have room
to give Team Coffee a place in the story
because there was already too many characters to handle
and all the prom stuff?
Did Monty and co. suddenly drop the climactic fight
on the rest of the creators at the last minute
and then they had to scramble
to give it any sort of last minute justification?
Did the creative leads all mutually agree
that the best way to end a season of the show
was for it to star a bunch of random new characters?
I don't know, and it doesn't feel right to speculate,
but I do know that the way things are
means the story sucks.
The plot scenes of the show feel so weightless
and contribute so little to the thing
that really works, the fights,
that the story ends up being basically an afterthought.
I do have to say, though, it does look like
at some point in the production process
Team Coffee, or at least Velvet,
were meant to play a larger role in the show
and there is evidence that suggests this.
The behind-the-scenes production diaries for volume two
spend a lot of time specifically covering
the creation and development of Velvet.
So we thought we would introduce you
to the various parts of the production pipeline
by following the supporting character of Velvet
that we introduced in volume one
and follow her from concept to modeling
and how she comes to life in the recording booth
and in the animation and in the edit.
They sifted through hundreds of fan submissions.
Over 1,300 submissions.
We see the modelers and rigging and artists
working on her and her weapons.
We see the effort that goes into designing
the case for her cool weapon,
but we don't want to spoil what's in it.
So this is what her weapon's gonna be in.
We're not showing the weapon yet,
because you're not gonna see that yet.
But we need something for her to carry it in.
You know, as if to imply that at some point in the show,
we would see Velvet have a box with the weapon in it
and people go, ooh, what's in it?
And she'd be like, ah, you'll see.
We meet the voice actress, all of this stuff.
Hours and hours of multiple artists
putting time and attention into creating this character
and all of this work goes into the creation
of a character who, due to some kind of natural disaster,
is on screen for, like, 30 seconds maximum
and does nothing just to give you a sense
of how miserably mismanaged the writing was.
Velvet is speaking for about 14 seconds
of volume two of RWBY.
I just showed you all of it.
The interview with the voice actress
in the behind-the-scenes material is longer than that.
I think volume two might have needed a second draft.
This fight is technically really cool looking
and I really enjoy the animation,
especially this bit where the Grimm's legs flip out,
but imagine how much better the scene would have felt
if you knew who these characters were
or if this fight felt at all like part of a story,
you know?
It turns out that even compared to Machinima,
making an animated series is, like, really hard.
A whole ton of people have to work together
as part of a huge process to get this thing made.
And RWBY is a higher level of production
than any other show we've ever produced.
And if the process isn't being managed very well
or the big picture ideas aren't there,
then the resulting show suffers massively.
There are tons of scenes in the show
that are fairly decent, especially the fights,
but because of issues with putting the show together,
the result is a show that's less than the sum of its parts
and what feels like two full seasons of teething problems.
You know, there are lots of shows with, like,
fun fights to watch like JoJo's Bizarre Adventure
which I brought up earlier,
but the thing about those shows is
even when I remember the really cool fights,
I go back and watch entire episodes
or arcs of the show again.
I don't just go like,
oh, remember that fight? That fight's good.
Let's just watch that out of context.
Like, no, the storytelling is part
of what accentuates those scenes.
Fights in JoJo's Bizarre Adventure feel meaningful
because they've been built up to by the plot.
Monty's fights are still some of the coolest fights,
but they're never gonna have the impact they could have done
because either due to a lack of planning
of what the story would be or very poor writing choices
being made in connecting his action sequences,
the story these fights should have been a part of
is practically non-existent,
and honestly, it just seems like such a waste, you know?
So far we've mostly talked about the production
and execution angle of RWBY,
the telling of the story, the conveyance of the world,
and how well the writers incorporated
the action sequences,
but now we need to dig one layer deeper
and discuss the story they're trying to tell.
Remember that first fight in the dust store
and how I talked about how it is kind of a good idea
for an introductory scene?
Because introducing your protagonist
by having them stop a robbery is a good idea
for an opening.
In fact, it's a good intro
in the movie they got this idea from.
Oh, plot twist!
["Planet of the Apes"]
["Planet of the Apes"]
Cowboy Bebop is a great anime.
It's a 26-episode series,
and it also has a feature-length movie.
In the movie, they reintroduce
the main characters from the show
by having there be a convenience store
getting held up at gunpoint,
and Spike, the main character,
comes in with headphones on and shops around
pretending he can't tell what's going on
before expertly taking them all out
with some backup from his friend.
This is a really good opening scene.
The problem with RWBY is that its writers
didn't seem to know why it was a good opening.
This opening works well in the movie
because it takes the opportunity
to tell us about our characters
and how they think.
Spike tells a guy holding an old woman hostage
that he doesn't care if he shoots her.
Sorry, lady, but we don't protect or serve.
This is strictly business.
What?
Guess you'll just have to chalk it up to bad luck.
Which makes you think, oh, wow,
maybe this guy has no real regard for human life,
but then it turns out he did that
to get the guy to turn his gun on him
in order to save the lady's life,
so really he has no regard for his own life
and will gladly put himself in extra danger
if it means it might help someone else.
This scene is good because it's what we call
characterization.
We're learning about our main character
and how he thinks.
The action is well animated and nice looking,
but that's secondary to the experience
of learning about our characters.
We're learning how little Spike values his own life.
If you keep on pushing it like this,
you're really going to get cut down to size for good.
Sorry.
I'm not exactly the delicate, cautious type.
In the show, we have a lot of time
to learn in detail that Spike has embraced
a very specific philosophy toward his life.
Whatever happens, happens.
And he doesn't even really see himself as alive,
and this enables him to more easily throw himself
at life or death situations.
How he got this way is part of the story.
The movie sets up this part of his character
incredibly quickly for people who didn't see the show
or refreshes people who need a reminder
by showing how he saves a woman's life
by making sure it's him being shot at instead.
We're seeing a dimension of his character
which the rest of the story is going to go on to explore.
What does a man who doesn't value his own life
do with his life other than constantly risk it
in ways he didn't have to?
Is this a heroic trait or is it a bit sad
to constantly live this way?
Welcome to the core themes of Cowboy Bebop.
I mean, the movie's literally called
Knocking on Heaven's Door.
Like, the film's about these ideas.
This robbery doesn't really have anything
to do with the plot at all.
It's an unrelated opening scene,
but Cowboy Bebop's scene is better storytelling
because it is telling you things
and you are learning something
and your brain is thinking about it.
I wanna know more about what Spike's deal is.
I wanna see what he does next.
What does Ruby set up about Ruby in this first scene?
Well, she's reading weapon magazine
and actually distracted instead of pretending
which I guess shows us that she likes weapons a lot
and she's still a child who doesn't pay much attention
to her surroundings.
We also see she's a really strong fighter.
For example, without taking her weapon out,
using her bare hands,
she beats the shit out of two guys
bigger than her and sends them flying.
Remember this part. I'm gonna do a thing.
This isn't really much characterization.
Events in stories, even in intensive action sequences,
are compelling largely because of how meaningful
they are to the audience and this is achieved
by developing a connection with the characters.
The gang in Bebop choose to get involved in this
and choose how specifically to handle
everything that happens,
and Spike even deliberately chooses
to put himself in way more danger
to try to help someone else.
What these decisions are
and why they make them are interesting.
The story of this movie is what we call character-driven.
In this opening scene,
Ruby never actually has to make a choice.
She just happens to be there,
just happens to be a badass anime warrior
who can beat these guys easily,
and then just happens to be seen doing it
by a professor at Anime Hogwarts
who refers her to the headmaster.
Ruby gets into this school and is therefore present
for the rest of the plot of the show
because she happened to be in a store
while it was being robbed.
This isn't character-driven story writing.
This is coincidence-driven story writing.
Also, about this scene where Ruby is, like,
being interrogated by Glinda and Gandalf Goku,
they're, like, in this dimly lit chamber
like it's a prison or something,
but then it turns out that she was brought here
to be invited to a school.
Hello. Nice to meet you.
You want to come to my school?
Why is it shot and lit like an interrogation?
Where are they?
Is this, like, a safe house that this guy has?
Okay, there actually is an explanation
for why this scene is like this,
and we're gonna get into it.
Don't you worry. It's a doozy.
So the issue with the dust store robbery
is that Ruby doesn't actually choose to do anything.
A fight happens at her, and she wins.
To be honest, that's basically the entire plot of the show,
except sometimes the fight happens
at someone else we barely know.
So the issue with this scene is lack of characterization,
and this isn't a failure of the writing
of the specific scene but a more general problem
with the way the creative leads treat the characters.
Ruby hasn't been made a particularly interesting person.
She has a cool gun and is good at fighting
and wants to be a hero, and that's about it.
Your book. Does it have a name?
It's about a man with two souls.
I love books.
I love books.
Our main character, ladies and gentlemen.
Coming up with compelling characters
who make interesting decisions
is basically the core job of stories.
Ruby is effectively a blank slate,
so she's just not interesting
except when she's physically doing something interesting
with her cool gun, like bouncing in the air
using its blowback to slow her descent.
That's interesting for a couple of seconds.
Ruby's so poorly characterized
that the writers are still making up their minds
multiple seasons in to the point
that even what little we do know about her
gets rewritten to try to make her more interesting
than she first appeared.
For example, when Ruby falls into the plot,
she doesn't have a weapon with her,
but luckily, as we've seen,
she's an expert at hand-to-hand combat
and can easily dispatch the...
Ow!
Oh, wait.
Between these two scenes, the writers decided
it would be more interesting for Ruby
to be useless without her weapon.
Wow, you are much more manageable
without that oversized gardening tool of yours.
So now we're in a situation
where characters' basic abilities
are being rewritten on a whim
to try to make the story more interesting,
and maybe it is more interesting,
and all you have to do to engage with this new story
is forget the events of the very first scene in the show.
So what little characterization is happening
in this scene gets rewritten later.
This means even in potentially cool scenes
taken directly from one of the best anime ever,
the scene doesn't work because the character
doesn't have an opportunity to act,
to make choices, so, yeah,
I'm gonna say this scene doesn't work very well,
because it doesn't have any decently
thought-out characters in it
and therefore has nothing to tell or show us about them
except for the basic aesthetic design
of Ruby and her weapon
and the coolness of the fight animations.
So the writers evidently had seen
the opening of Cowboy Bebop the movie,
enjoyed it because it's great...
Nice.
And decided to start their show in a similar way
but didn't know why Cowboy Bebop's opening
actually worked so well,
so they just borrowed the surface components.
Store robbery, acting distracted,
headphones, and cool fight
without using them in a way
that does anything specific for the audience.
Now, you could say, well, how do you know
this is the scene that inspired them?
What if the scenes just happen to be similar?
Well, if that's the case, the scene still doesn't work
and the comparison still shows how much better
the scene could have been if it was being used
for actual characterization, but, yeah,
maybe the similarities are accidental.
To prove they aren't, I'd have to somehow demonstrate
the creators had seen Cowboy Bebop
and there's just no easy way.
If I had to recommend a show to someone
looking to get into anime,
I'd go with my personal favorite, Cowboy Bebop,
because I think it's got enough, like,
Western stuff going on.
I'll just say Spike.
I'm just gonna say Spike Spiegel
from Cowboy Bebop because he's just like water
and he's so cool.
My favorite is Cowboy Bebop.
My favorite anime is Cowboy Bebop.
My favorite anime is Cowboy Bebop
and although it's not technically an anime,
I also love Avatar the Last Airbender.
Avatar. Hmm.
Okay, so I'm gonna go out on a limb here
and say maybe Miles was inspired by his favorite anime
while trying to write an anime.
You know what? I keep falling back to Bebop,
but, uh, uh, uh,
you shouldn't just run away from your past.
Sometimes you just gotta deal with the problems
that you started and if you don't,
they will catch up with you.
Keep in mind I'm not saying this is plagiarism.
Creative theft is a different thing entirely.
I'm saying this is derivative
and doesn't even replicate the thing it's trying to.
It's certainly not wrong to draw inspiration
from other works you like
or even pay deliberate homage to things you enjoy
or which seem fitting to reference in a scene.
I mean, Cowboy Bebop does this all the time
and the convenience store scene
actually references Pulp Fiction
when one of the robbers they don't know about
comes out of the bathroom and surprises them
which happens literally three times in Pulp Fiction.
I'm gonna take a shit.
Pretty sure this is a reference
and I should know.
I had a lot of very long arguments
on now-deleted fan forums about whether this counts
and let me just say to Mazin Kaiser X
if you're still out there,
I have a YouTube channel now
so fuck you, you little philistine.
I win.
What I'm getting at here is that firstly,
I've always been cool
but also that there's nothing wrong
with wearing your inspiration on your sleeve.
What is wrong is doing it without understanding
what made the original thing work
because now it's not a cool introduction
to a character, story, and setting
inspired by another good thing.
It's a weird, clunky, and unnecessary scene
whose best feature is it reminds people of Cowboy Bebop
but RWBY doesn't just remind me of Bebop.
It reminds me of a lot of other anime
and this is a result of the show's design.
And then the next day, he was like,
hey, we should make an anime.
So as prep before writing the show,
Monty gave the writers some homework.
Anime homework.
Uh, I went to Carrie and I went, I, I,
I gave him anime homework.
If you, if you want to be honest,
you should do some anime homework
so I just started giving him shows to watch
that we could, you know, work comparatively to
and then, um, Miles was the second person onto this
where I would give him anime homework.
Watch this show if you wanna, if you wanna be part of it.
Now, I don't like admitting this.
I'm kind of secretive about it,
but I've seen a lot of anime in my time
and I know a bit about it.
I'd like to think no one's noticed this about me,
but we've somehow finally reached a place
where proper criticism of a piece of media
relies on using that knowledge,
a concept which terrifies me,
but with the benefit of your trust,
we'll come out the other side having learned more
and improved our analytical technique.
So in the name of science,
let's punch this plate of spaghetti
in order to reverse engineer it to its component ingredients
and find out what's really going on.
It's a reference, but I'm also making
a clever metaphor for analysis.
do-da-da-da-da-da-da-da-da-da-da-da-da.
♪♪
RWBY is inspired by anime not just in terms of visuals
but more directly by the tropes and idioms
and basic story elements of shows the creators liked
or at least were told to watch.
The problem is it draws far too much
on ideas and concepts that feel like anime
without really understanding what made
the things it's borrowing actually work
in the shows they were in.
RWBY is a really strange bunch of shows,
and if you're willing to check,
you can even find out which ones.
In a Reddit thread, Miles Luna said what some of the shows
on his anime homework list were.
Among them, Gurren Lagann, Soul Eater,
Naruto, Bleach, and Black Rock Shooter.
Some of these shows have direct parallels
with RWBY's story.
Naruto, Bleach, and Soul Eater especially
have direct contrasts.
All these shows have large casts of characters
who all, for their specific story reasons,
have their own unique powers.
This is really traditional for shounen shows.
Everyone kind of has their own deal, and in Bleach,
almost every main character has a unique magical sword
which grants them a specific ability,
and the main character in Soul Eater wields a cool scythe.
It's not that hard to tell what ideas RWBY
is borrowing from these shows, is it?
But again, the core elements being borrowed
are the really basic Wikipedia-level synopsis ideas.
The sort of stuff people who don't watch anime
think anime is about,
like the school for learning anime fighting,
the large cast of characters with cool abilities and powers,
the super simple stuff that isn't really
why anyone watches something.
These shows work because they're really about
the characters and their choices and relationships,
and they happen to be set against a fun,
fantastical background with cool action.
Boruto's dad and his army of frenemies
live rich inner lives and form interesting connections
with each other and the audience as they grow and change.
In Soul Eater, the cool weapons are alive
and lots of focus is put on how they relate to
and work with their users, and this also happens in Bleach
but, you know, in a way where it seems really awesome
and you choose to watch it over all the other shounen
at the time and then it crushes your hopes and dreams,
and it seems like in the early RWBY Weiss relationship,
this is what they were going for.
The way they bicker in the early trial
and Weiss is angry about not being the leader later,
this is honestly, genuinely the beginning
of an interesting relationship,
but instead of making this an aspect of the show,
they fix it and make someone else's life
the focus of the show for half of it,
and then someone else turns up to do all the fighting,
so the thing that makes these shows work,
the characters, their relationships,
your engagement with the characters as they do
fun fights is absent.
It's a stew but without the most important ingredient,
the stew mix. That's the rule, by the way.
You're allowed to make food metaphors in criticism
but only when they're actually a clever reference.
At best, the main character,
who theoretically should be the most interesting,
is a lady in a nice outfit with a cool gun.
That's a really low ceiling to put on a story.
RWBY feels like fan fiction of a show that doesn't exist.
Except, no, that's not true.
There is one specific show it feels a whole lot
like fan fiction for.
To quote Miles Luna again,
if you want to get a feel of what the show will be like,
watch Avatar The Last Airbender.
Oh, this explains a lot of things.
Once you go watch Avatar, you start to realize
where a lot of the show came from.
For example, Avatar is set in a world
with four nations in it.
Long ago, the four nations lived together in harmony.
RWBY has four kingdoms,
so you see it's different.
The four kingdoms.
They're called kingdoms because, well,
they can't call them nations, can they?
In Avatar, in times of stress,
the Avatar enters a state where his eyes glow
and he manifests amazing powers.
You'll never guess that three seasons into the story
with zero setup that this is a thing,
RWBY's eyes suddenly glow,
and she's revealed to have the amazing power
to instantly turn even the most powerful Grimm to stone.
You learn she has this power the instant it happens,
and you only learn what this power is in retrospect
because there was no room in the story
to set this up, was there?
Another cool thing about Avatar is that the Avatar
reincarnates into a new form whenever he dies.
Completely coincidentally, there's a character in RWBY
whose spirit goes on to inhabit a new form
whenever he dies. Amazing.
You see, it's actually a clever twist
because no one would have expected them
to be that obvious,
so when they really did just do Avatar again,
it's a genuine surprise.
Oh, another massively important plot element.
One of the antagonists is a revolutionary
political movement reacting to oppression
led by a man in a mask with horrendous scars underneath.
Was I talking about RWBY there?
No, I was talking about Avatar, Legend of Korra,
but, yes, that also happens in RWBY.
Oh, actually, you see, the scar is different
because it's over one of his eyes.
That's slightly different from Avatar,
so it's not the same thing.
You see, no, what's this picture of Zuko doing here?
Then in later seasons, they decide to take the story
in a very different direction,
you know, to make it a bit more unique,
so now the characters have to travel the world
and visit lots of different towns and villages
and cultures on their way,
which is completely unlike Avatar
because when it happens in Avatar, it's good.
Remember when I was positive about the potential
of RWBY's story and setting?
Well, it feels like I'm really just complimenting
the material it borrowed.
So many of RWBY's choices seem made
specifically that way because it was that way
in Avatar even though it's completely unnecessary
to borrow those parts.
Why is it that every time you play with magic water,
I get soaked?
It's not magic. It's waterbending.
Oh, my God.
Is that where the characters' powers
not being magic came from?
Why would you even think to do that?
I always thought each season of RWBY being called a volume
was a bit weird and unwieldy, and guess what?
It turns out it sounds way better
when they're called books.
Even the intro voiceover sometimes sounds
like they right-click Thesaurus
some aspects of Avatar's intro.
My grandmother used to tell me stories
about the old days.
Legends.
Stories scattered through time.
It's like the show's playing a game
of telephone with Avatar.
Those words in that order sounded good,
so let's use some words that are a bit similar
in a different order and also make it all about dust.
The thing that made Avatar's introduction work
is it set up a lot of stuff at once.
For example, how this settings version of magic worked,
the thing you didn't mention at all,
or the fact there were four big nations.
You know, the thing you didn't mention at all
except for when four castle-looking things
turn up for three seconds before disappearing.
Jaune is a pretty direct analog for Sokka
to the point where the creators just say
that's what he's based on.
Oh, no, I was saying, like,
when you first did Reeds and I was like,
we need, like, a Sokka character.
And this retroactively explains
why Jaune's plot line was so weird.
Jaune Arc had this subplot of Jaune
not accepting Pyrrha's offer to help train him
to be a better fighter,
but his explanation for why was always really strange.
He wants to get better without help,
or he's not really a hero or something.
If I can't do this on my own,
then what good am I?
But he never tries and never pays attention in class,
so that's bullshit,
and at the end of his section of the story,
he just accepts her help.
Standing up to a bully taught him to...
This confusing arc happens because it happened to Sokka.
In Avatar, a story with characters
with depth and infinitely better world building,
in the beginning Sokka is not a great warrior,
but he desperately wants to be one.
He's from a culture that looks down on the idea
of women being fighters,
but then he gets wrecked by an order
of female warriors who protect a village
on their travels and has to confront
his beliefs about women.
He learns a lesson from this
and begs them to train him.
He gets better as a fighter,
but this plot line is super engaging for an audience
because we get to watch him grow as a person
and change his beliefs.
Sokka starts out, like, kind of as a shitty teen.
I thought I would really not like him
when I first watched Avatar,
but he grows so much.
He becomes such an interesting character super quickly.
So now it's clear why Jaune's arc
is seemingly missing pieces.
It's not just that Sokka was written better,
but more specifically,
it's clear the writers liked the idea
of giving their Sokka character the same arc,
but the problem with this arc is
it means one of your core characters starts out
as a bit of a chauvinist and needs time and work
to grow into a better person,
but if you're trying to write a cool, progressive anime
starring mostly girls,
you don't want to have a character acting like that,
do you? That sounds kind of heavy,
and are you really going to write your character
who you voice to act like that?
So Jaune is written to already start out
as basically a good person
who respects women's abilities as fighters
who simply needs to learn to accept help
instead of refusing it for what is now no reason.
It actually turns out that a ton of weird things
about RWBY happened that way
because they were like that in Avatar.
The interrogation thing in the first episode of RWBY
was always a silly choice.
Why take her to this weird dimly lit empty room
to invite her to a school?
But it makes much more sense if you happen to have seen
the first episode of Legend of Korra
when Korra gets arrested and interrogated.
If a scene in RWBY seems out of place
or like a scene from another show
just happened for no reason in the middle of this one,
it's probably because it did,
so it's pretty clear to the point
they literally admit it that a big problem
with RWBY's writing is that the creators
are grasping wildly at shows they like
for things to recreate in their show
in the hopes of crafting a story.
It's only technically been written
in one sense of the word.
It's more of a reconstituted amalgam
of things they thought were cool elsewhere.
Grind up all that meat and stuff it
into a sausage casing or I guess
in this case a body pillow.
No, Miles, what are you doing? This is really embarrassing.
Ruby Rose is a 15-year-old girl.
If you like anything about RWBY
and you haven't seen much anime before
because it didn't seem like it was for you,
I guarantee you right now there's a show
in this list that the thing you liked
about RWBY came from and you'd like
that show a hell of a lot more
and let's be honest, it's probably Avatar.
A lot of people I've met who are really big fans
of RWBY tend to be not into anime.
They don't think it's for them or they haven't watched it
before yet, but if you take the plunge
and then you see how good a show using these ideas
could be, you'll very quickly be able
to see why a lot of people with a bit more
of a frame of reference are so disappointed
with this show. Go pick a show from that list
and have a better time. Seriously.
Just make sure it's not Bleach. Don't make the same mistake
I did. Please, you mustn't! You have to!
There's a scene in volume two where it turns out
Yang and Ruby have a family dog called Zwei.
There's a dog in Cowboy Bebop
of the same breed called Ain.
Get it? The creators are trying to make a cute
reference to a show they like.
They don't seem to have realized they've referenced
all the shows they like quite enough already.
I was hoping they'd eventually
try doing something else.
The real impact of all this on Ruby's potential
is that it means the things
that are truly unique about it get ignored.
Because the world building is vague
and really just a loose approximation
of nine other cartoons, all kinds
of little tidbits crop up that would be
so interesting if they went anywhere
but never will. Remember Crescent Rose?
You know, one of the most dangerous weapons
ever designed? One of the most dangerous
weapons ever designed? There is one
really interesting story element to it
which is that Ruby designed it.
Well, I'm kind of a dork
when it comes to weapons. I guess I did go
a little overboard in designing it.
Ruby designed this weapon. One of the most
dangerous weapons ever designed. Now,
if you were looking at the script and you'd
written these two things, what you should
do at that moment is kiss yourself
and realize that you've just struck
fucking gold. The main character
of your show is a child inventor
who can craft incredible machines
that kill. What a fantastic
premise for a story and Ruby
loves to read weapon magazines
and nerds out about the weapons she sees
when she first gets to anime warrior school.
Like, they've almost written a
character here and everything else about
Ruby's character is the most milquetoast
stuff possible like, oh, she wants to be a hero?
Great. I love books.
I think this line annoys me so much because
like, Ruby has a really interesting character
trait you could be doing something with.
And you're doing this?
No! No, you can't! I forbid it!
And when this comes up,
Ruby's talking to Jaune whose deal is
he just has a regular sword.
Like, it's a punchline. And when I was
first watching the show, I was really having my doubts
about where things were going, but when this happened,
I thought, oh, cool.
Ruby's gonna help him design a unique
weapon that really works for him and we're
gonna see them coming up with it and building
it and developing as friends and that's
gonna be so cool. Jaune's gonna come
into his own and learn things about himself
as he does it and grow as a fighter
and as a person and there's something really wholesome
about learning a skill and building something
in a story. That'll be a really cool
thing to follow. And then,
it didn't happen for a season because they were doing
anime bullshit instead.
Fighting monsters, dealing with bullies,
falling asleep during pointless
exposition. Oh, and in the show as well.
And then for years, I kept thinking,
when are they gonna do it? When are they gonna do it?
When are they going to use
Ruby's interesting character trait
that they just seemingly forgot she has?
And then, finally,
in volume four,
they go to a blacksmith and a character
who we've never seen before and never will again
upgrades Jaune's sword using
pieces of his girlfriend's armor.
And Ruby rarely, if ever, talks about
the fact she made Crescent Rose and
she stops nerding out about weapons except
for, like, once per season if the
writers remember that was her one unique
character trait. Ah, but I'm sure you're
going somewhere with this Avatar remake.
Don't let me distract you. No, I'm not even fucking
kidding you. Even the forging of
a sword out of some cool material he
has is a thing Sokka does in Avatar.
It just doesn't stop.
It never stops. This show has
so many cool concepts that
just crop up like that where if you're paying
attention, there's tremendous potential being
laid down here and then they ignore it to just
loosely copy stuff from
fucking Bleach. Look, that guy
has the sword that's a bit like the
one from Bleach. Do you remember
Bleach? I remember
Bleach. Someone
please validate me remembering so much
Bleach. There's a Roger Ebert quote I always
really liked and used in a draft of
this video I was working on like five
years ago which Lindsay Ellis happened
to use first in a video before
me so now it feels like I'm ripping her off.
Thanks, Lindsay. Where when reviewing
Battlefield Earth, he makes the comment that the
director has learned from better films
that directors sometimes tilt their
cameras but he has not learned why.
I'm gonna take a shit. I believe Miles
when he tells me Avatar is one of his
favorite shows but I'm not convinced
he knows why he liked it. Cowboy Bebop
is cool because it's about a man who
believes his life is already over
throwing himself into life or death situations
to feel alive again. Spike
Spiegel carries a weight with
him and you have to watch him do his best
to pretend he isn't. Cowboy
Bebop is not cool because
he's good at spinny kicks and
his friend has a robot arm and frankly
the idea that that's what really
mattered is personally offensive
to me. If you really respect this
material, you should borrow the things
that gave it meaning, not all of this
surface level stuff. This is kind of
the important thing to drill in on here.
These shows aren't about cool powers
or great visuals or engaging
fights. They have those but on a core
level, what they're really about is
characters, people who you feel
things for, who you watch do things,
who you can be invested in. If you
don't have that base layer of engagement
with the people in your story,
you don't really have much of anything.
If you have a cool fight but you haven't made
people interested in or understand
why they're fighting, then you
don't even really have the fight, do you?
Lots of things in the show are references to
other Rooster Teeth properties. There's
in-jokes everywhere, posters from other shows,
quotes from their podcasts,
this store's name is a pun on
a simple walk into Mordor,
that show they did about walking in New Zealand.
Even tiny things like
Jaune's locker number is a reference
to the address of Rooster Teeth's old studio.
Whatever unique story and
potential there is in here, it's taking
refuge behind an immense patchwork
quilt of references to
other things they like, other things
their company made, and eventually
references to the few things people
seemed to like about the show itself.
One of the standout moments that people
really liked about early RWBY is the part
where Nora pokes Ren's nose and says
boop. Boop. People really
liked that because it's a genuinely
simple and cute moment that you don't
need to know Rooster Teeth lore to enjoy
and isn't trying and failing
to emulate something else. It's just nice.
You know? That's good. It's cute.
People also really liked the way Penny introduced
herself because it's genuinely a really
nice moment. Like, Weiss accidentally
knocks her over and she just goes
salutations.
That's funny. That's good writing. That's
characterization. It's immediately clear
that something is up with Penny. It's good.
Please stop being sometimes
good and getting my hopes up.
So, of course, in addition to selling
merchandise that quotes these moments,
in the second season Nora starts wearing
a boop shirt. They don't have room
to make the prom stuff interesting
or to connect Monty's fights properly
and make them feel like part of a story
but they had room to go, hey,
remember when she said boop?
Well, it's in stores now. The show is
just a continuous list of references
to other things that were good,
and by the middle of season two, sorry,
book two, sorry, volume two,
it's referencing the few good parts
of itself. Writing, like,
the word writing is often
used to mean a lot of
different things but at its core
writing means
making decisions and
risking making the wrong one.
What's acutely frustrating about Ruby
is that Miles and Kerry don't
necessarily always make
bad decisions. It's that they have
done almost everything they can to
make them, to abdicate the
responsibility of having to write
a story of their own. They don't understand
exactly why the
things they're borrowing actually were
enjoyable, which makes it worse, but
centrally they're in this mess because they're
going out of their way not to be
unique and thereby failing to do
interesting things with or apparently
even notice the potential
that an original animated work made for
the internet with no oversight can have.
The show could have been
anything, and it wants to be anything
other than itself, and that wasted
potential will never not be tremendously
disappointing. When you take
no risks and try to say
very little while looking like
you're saying something important, you get
a story element like the Faunus.
By later in the first volume,
we finally sat in a classroom and learned what
the Faunus are and also seen the bully character
mistreating one of them. The Faunus are
a stand-in for the oppressed races
of the world. Yes, that is correct.
I did not misspeak. These guys
have to talk about racism now
and I am here for
it. I've heard it mentioned that this aspect
of the story was originally conceived by
Monty, but unfortunately the story
is being written by the men who brought you
My Semblance is Polarity?
The big twist in volume
one is that Blake is a Faunus.
She gets mad at Weiss for being a racist
and runs away and dramatically
takes off her bow to reveal
her fat ears in addition
to her normal ears. Have you guessed which
fairy tale character Blake is based on yet?
Well, I'll tell you.
She's Beauty and the Beast.
Ugh!
Now, I don't know about you, but Ruby didn't
initially strike me as a show that was
trying to be about something this heavy.
I mean, for the most part, it's been an adventure
story about kids beating up monsters
and bad guys, so when this happened,
I don't know, it seemed a little weird.
Like, is this particular show with
the tone you've set so far really ready
for something as serious as this?
I'm queen of the castle.
I'm queen of the castle.
Like, we're in the middle of this fairly light-hearted
show, so light-hearted characters have
a magic shield in fights so they can't get
hurt too badly, and then in a classroom
the comedy fast-talking coffee-drinking
professor guy, voiced by
the guy who plays Caboose in Red vs.
Blue, starts to discuss the
horrific tragedy of the mistreatment
of the Faunus. Prior to the Faunus
Rights Revolution, more popularly known as
the Faunus War, they begin to explore
the topic of racism by using
the comedy silly-talky man.
Now, have
any among you been subjugated or
discriminated because of your Faunus heritage?
The issue of racism is a big part
of the rest of the story, or at least it tries
to be. A central component
of the plot is the White Fang, a group
of Faunus who do crimes and terrorism
in the name of Faunus liberation. The White Fang
are presented as antagonists in the
story. They work with the bad man from volume
one and do a bunch of crimes, including
the train thing. A lot of the goons getting
fought in fights in volumes one,
two, three,
four, and five are
White Fang members. When the main characters
aren't fighting Grimm, they're beating
the shit out of in-universe minorities,
but it's okay. You know they're bad because
they all talk in the evil voice.
Finally,
I get to kill a shnee.
Oh, I think he might be a bad
guy. Once again, we're seeing the writing problems
that made Jaune's character so terrible
creeping in here. This argument between
Weiss and Blake comes to a head because,
at least initially, Weiss was written to be
kind of racist.
Hmm. The White Fang.
What an awful bunch of degenerates.
I don't particularly trust
the Faunus. Her family profited
from exploitative Faunus labor and maybe
slavery, but it's hard to tell exactly what
because the show is written badly. Infamous
for its controversial labor forces.
And she seems to take the opportunity to be shitty
about Faunus when it presents itself.
Stop calling him a degenerate. He's a person.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Would you like me to stop referring to the trash
can as a trash can?
But at some point down the line, the writers were smart
enough to see a problem with writing a main character
with this flaw. Weiss being racist
might affect the audience's ability
to relate to the character, wouldn't it?
The creators want the audience to like this lady
as they go on adventures with her and watch her
dote on pup boy Bebop.
How many members of your audience are really gonna
want to cosplay as the Weiss
supremacist? So her beliefs about
the Faunus are quietly dropped off
screen and we are to assume she's
anti-racist in future volumes.
She just says, hey, whatever, we're a team.
Let's work together now, and then in the next volume
this side of her character is quietly
forgotten. Knowing this show, I
presume a man told her off screen not to be
a racist anymore and she went, okay.
In volume two she says she wants
to become a Huntress specifically to try
to do better than her family name has
been in the past and she doesn't like what her
father is doing, implicitly saying
she became a fighter who protects the world
because she wants to not be like her
racist family. This is done instead
of having her grapple with her
prejudice towards a group of people and
growing and changing and learning.
You know, akin to what a story would
do. They made her racist and then rewrote
her to never have been racist.
The writers are far too precious
about their characters to permit them to have,
like, flaws or lives
or even personalities beyond
cookie cutter heroics.
They don't need to learn anything
or grow, which makes them fundamentally
uninteresting, and in the same way
the writers are far too precious
about their world itself. They want
their world to not be so fundamentally
flawed that a group like the White Fang is necessary.
You see, the issue here is the White Fang
are basically in the right. The Faunus
are an oppressed people whose
struggle for liberation and equality
is immediately, the instant you
actually think about it, the morally
correct side of the argument. Spoilers
for real life, but we recently discovered
in lab tests on mice that racism
is wrong, but, like, if you have a movement
whose purpose is to liberate an oppressed
group, that means your society
has some incredibly deep-set problems,
right? People who need liberating
from something? You know the Black Panthers
didn't pop into existence because things
were fine in the 60s, right?
Oh, I really hate Hbomb's political videos,
but I love his media stuff. It's way better.
Ha! I tricked you! But Miles and
Kerry realized at some point that
if you introduce a group like this,
then the main society of your story
is a systemically racist one,
and a huge portion of your main characters
would be tacitly implicated in this
by living in that society and not
doing anything about the way those people are treated.
Basically, they'd be writing a pretty grim
story where almost everyone
is on some level racist
or at least okay with an unequal
system because a lot of shit would need
to change if there's a group like the White Fang
running around and anyone sitting around
enjoying the status quo instead of doing anything
wouldn't be a heroic or positive
character in this setting. In other words,
you'd have a bit too much
social commentary making everyone
really uncomfortable about the parallels
to real world history and in some places
the real world present which would
be an interesting story. I'd like a story
like that really, but which would kind of suck
the fun out of your anime cartoon about
killing monsters with sci-fi rocket fists.
People aren't gonna buy your boop
t-shirts if they're sad about racism
so the writer's objective was to make
a show which explores racism
but without making anyone too
uncomfortable, without risking actually
saying anything about our society,
and without risking saying that the White Fang
might have a point so everyone can have
fun watching people beat them up because
they're the bad guys. We wouldn't want any
implications to think about. So,
firstly, the mistreatment that appears in the story
is always incredibly minor.
It's established that the Faunus have already
had a civil rights movement of sorts
and been granted equality but just aren't
really getting it yet in some places.
Despite being promised equality, the Faunus
were subjected to discrimination and hate.
Some specific people are still
kind of racist. Faunus get bullied
by some people in school. There's a
no Faunus sign on one bar.
There's nothing wrong with the system anymore.
Individual racists are the problem.
Since we aren't living in a racist
nightmare world, we can feel less bad
about the status quo of the setting and more
okay with the idea that the White Fang are bad.
But even then, they still have a roughly
sympathetic goal. If a shadowy
group were blowing up the businesses
of people who refuse to serve Faunus or
attacking people with unethical Faunus
labor practices, which I assume is what
a controversial labor force is,
half the people watching might not realize
these are supposed to be the bad guys.
You can't have a story where the liberation movement
has a point because then you're writing a story
that's slightly more complex than
the help we need to stop the bad guys.
And that's not fun.
If you're writing a story for tiny babies,
you want to be writing a generally okay world
that's being threatened by evil outsiders.
You know, like the monsters you could have
already had be the main villains. So to add
an extra level of moral simplification,
they have the White Fang be recently under
new leadership that are way more violent
and pro-terrorism than normal.
Five years ago, our leader stepped down
and a new one took his place.
A new leader with a new way of thinking.
Okay, now they might have a point,
but they're just going about it all wrong
with this terrorism stuff.
Now we can all get behind how they're the bad guys
even if racism is wrong
and they maybe have a point.
Oh, I think she might be the bad guy,
et cetera. You get the point.
The story amounts to a long series
of justifications for why the organization
whose stated goal is the liberation
of an oppressed people can be
thought of as the antagonists.
The White Fang used to be good guys,
like agitating for progress in a nice way,
politely asking for racism to end
like good second-class citizens,
but then a new leader stepped in
who was more violent and aggressive,
and now they're the bad guys and not respectable anymore.
The problem is you're now effectively
writing a story in which the most prominent
villains are an oppressed people
who are reacting wrong to being oppressed.
Yeah, sure, racism is bad,
but you're supposed to take it up with your congressman, guys.
There's no nuance here.
The White Fang are written to be as unequivocally
in the wrong as possible.
The main White Fang member we're shown is that guy
who didn't care about killing innocent civilians
with bombs and who later turns out
to want to kill all humans
because he sees his people as the superior race.
The Faunus are the dominant species
of this planet.
Oh, also he wants to kill his ex-girlfriend
for breaking up with him
over the fact he's evil.
♪♪
The need to write an obvious villain
into the story has burned away
any relevance to the issues
the show was supposedly trying to explore
with this aspect of the story.
I will make it my mission
to destroy everything you love.
What is the show trying to say?
Racism is bad but don't kill civilians
or your ex-girlfriend?
Okay.
If you want to talk about real world issues,
you should actually do it
and if you don't, you don't have to.
You don't have to have a take on racism
and you especially don't have one
when you set your story in a fantasy world
where racism is over and the real bad guy
is a protest group that turned evil.
I never wanted this.
I wanted equality.
So, hey, remember Velvet?
That one character who seems like
some members of the team intended to be
more of a part of the story
and then she just wasn't?
It makes it just a little bit more egregious
that the story is kind of about
the persecution of her fucking race.
Like, how do you fuck this up this badly?
And for the record, that is not how human male teenagers
would treat bunny girls if they were real.
They would wait on them on hand and foot
and beg them to step on me.
Absolutely no one was holding a gun
to Miles and Kerry's heads and saying
to make the show about how they think Malcolm X
could have toned it down a little.
They did this by choice.
They were given free reign to write a story
and connect the dots on Monty's fights
and this is what they made?
Guys, I don't think you have as much to say
on this topic as you initially thought.
Instead of saying, oh, you know, the humans have a side.
They should just respect us more.
He turned into, yeah, let's get rid of the humans
and then they'll respect us because they'll be dead.
Let me just read that back to you
just to make that more clear.
He turned into, yeah,
let's get rid of the humans
and then they'll respect us
because they'll be dead.
Kerry,
are you sure you want to go with this?
There's also the problem of representation.
I'm not gonna criticize the show's diversity
or lack of it that much because I don't think
that's really my criticism to make
and I don't want to risk making it poorly on behalf of people
who could say something better about it than me.
There are doubtless plenty of people a whole lot
less white than me who like the show
and don't think it has a representation problem
although that's not saying much.
Most brands of literal cracker are browner than me.
Oh, shit, my fucking laundry.
Besides, I'm sure some people will tell you
there's plenty of Black people in the first season.
However, I can't help but notice
that they have managed to write a show
that tries, fails, but tries
to deal with the impact of racism
on a group of people in society but in such a way
that they didn't have to have too many
non-white characters.
Instead, they invented a fictional race
which consists almost entirely in the story
of white women with cute animal ears
and a cool buff white guy
with a tail. This was a
really clever decision.
It turns out the way to get weebs to understand
racism is to make the target a cat girl.
The white fang are like the Black Panthers
but with the emphasis on the panther.
I mean, sure, regular racism
is over in Remnant but here in the
real world, if there were too many Black characters
some of your audience members might
start to smell politics.
Now who will buy our boop shirts?
Black lives matter, especially when they're
white people with vague animal characteristics
but, you know, we can't risk
having too many people of color
in our show about racism.
By the way, you know this animated bit
I showed you? That's Blake telling her backstory
to Sun. Yes, Sun,
another Faunus. She is telling the backstory
of a movement Faunus are intimately aware
of that Sun says he knows about
Are you familiar with the white fang?
Of course. I don't think there's a Faunus
on the planet who hasn't heard of them.
which describes the history of the treatment of Faunus
to one of the only other Faunus
in the story. Exposition, guys.
Have her be telling this to someone who might
not know it like any
other character in the show.
Have you told your friends any of this?
Even Sun's asking why she's telling him.
And what's up with all of these teens preparing
elaborate speeches about their lives
and the world? If you try and get away with a monologue
that long in my household, your parents
tell you you're a horrible son and they hate you.
When you remove all of the
moral and ethical dimensions from
a story, the story disappears
too. When it comes down to it,
the white fang are a bunch of angry bad guys
in masks and all this talk about how
they're just reacting to mistreatment.
But don't worry, guys. Things are fine.
What they're reacting is boring
window dressing on a story that's basically
about how we have to stop the bad men
from blowing up the city and stealing all
of the precious jewels. The gang
gleefully kill dozens of white fang
members, throwing them off a train at high
speed where their remains will be shattered
and smashed into a pulp, unburied
in a collapsing tunnel covered in
monsters and explosives, and then later
the only exit from this monster-infested
tunnel is sealed shut, trapping
any of the survivors inside to
And sure, maybe they experienced racism
and suffering, but they decided
to be evil so they got what was coming.
If you kill one of these guys, your conscience
is clean. Oh, look, that one was black.
Do you feel represented yet? I'm not saying
you should have sympathy for these characters and that
killing them is wrong. What I'm saying is
it should be at least slightly more
complicated than this, and the fact the story
is written so that these characters are
just evil is a massive flaw.
It's like in the Dark Knight Rises.
Bane basically has a
point. Gotham is corrupt, and the
people are oppressed by a system that seeks to profit
from them and find new ways to spy
on and criminalize them if they resist.
The Occupy Wall Street movement had a lot to
say, and a lot of it was true.
This is a stock exchange. There's no money you can steal.
Really?
Then why are you people here? But if you put
that in your film, that means something's deeply
wrong with your actual society,
so Bane also wants to
kill everyone with a nuke, so now
when Batman beats the shit out of him and everyone
who stands in his way, it's not because Batman
is a tool of a corrupt establishment.
It's because he's heroically stopping this definitely
bad bad guy from killing
everyone. The moral complexity of the story
exists purely to sound cool
and get thrown away before it gets anyone
to think about the actual problems with our
world. The Dark Knight Rises is
complete bollocks because a villain who
might have a point is consciously
rewritten into a bad man in a
mask with a big bomb who Batman
needs to punch to win. Yay.
Good guys hitting the bad guy.
Don't think about Wall Street. The writers of RWBY
want to look like they're talking about
serious real world problems because that
seems cool and clever and meaningful,
but they don't want to run the risk of spoiling
the cartoon fun, and they certainly don't want
to risk the people in their audience who think talking
about racism is for SJWs to stop
watching, so we're left with generic
masked bad guys who want to use a train
to blow up a city and try
to cut off one of our main character's
heads with a chainsaw,
but maybe some of them have sad backstories
behind them being evil murderers
who want to kill their ex-girlfriend?
Oh, wow, how clever. No thanks.
In the actual modern day right now,
in fact, literally right now,
there are people marching out there in the streets
against systemic injustices,
racism, and police brutality,
and a not insignificant amount of people
are dismissing all of this as opportunism,
as looting, rioting,
people trying to cause chaos and anarchy
for no reason. When you tell a story
with such a massive fixation on a group
like this, what you're doing is saying
that there are people in real life like this.
Ruby is a deeply stupid
person's idea of what
racial politics are like. Watching this show
through now, I can't help
but be struck with the kind of horrible
feeling that some people are gonna watch
this and go, yeah, that's
what they're like, and the idea
of this show playing into people's
worst instincts is frankly
disgusting, but even on a basic story
level, having such a simplistic faction
like this driving so much of the plot
means that all their parts of the plot
basically suck. The potential
of this entire aspect of the story
is seemingly purposefully declawed,
rendering the whole thing as pointless
as if it hadn't happened. The bad guys
could have just been some evil, corrupted monsters
who chose to be bad because they're
bad for no reason, and the story
would have been better because it would have been more honest
and a lot less uncomfortable.
The end point of this bottomless pit of
compromises is, well,
a compromised story. A story
about nothing telling you very
unconvincingly that it's about something
actually important in our world
right now. No wonder the introduction
didn't mention them. They might as well
not have been there.
We can't really recount the history
of RWBY without talking about the death of
its creator, can we? After the end of volume
two and while in early production
on volume three, Monty Oum passed away
very suddenly of an allergic
reaction during routine surgery.
Monty's death was a really tragic event
that affected a lot of people, both
at Rooster Teeth and in Monty's
audience. Monty was well known as a
relentlessly passionate worker, and a
phrase commonly attributed to him by many,
including his widow, was,
so to carry on his passion,
almost in tribute to his life,
they continued making the show.
I'm going to keep analyzing the show now,
but as a fan of Monty's work since
Haloid came out, I want to mention that
I don't feel like I've had room to really celebrate
his specific skill and talent in this
video, so I'm working on another one just
about that. I've been a fan of Monty's for
most of my adult life, and I've wanted
to gush about why his stuff is so great,
but to make sure this video has any kind of
decent pace, I've had to cut most of it out.
I'll try and have that video done soon.
So, volume three obviously
struggles with a lot of issues. It's still got
a lot of the things we've already discussed.
It has the additional problem of the team having
to make do without its original creator,
but if anything, the biggest problem
volume three has is that it gets good.
Volume three opens on a big
tournament between teams from all the
anime warrior schools of the world.
Every single anime out there eventually does
their tournament arc, and, you know,
we wanted RWBY to have its version of that.
Because how better to prove
that RWBY is just like an anime
than to give it a tournament arc?
I mean, a story would
have been nice, but mid-fight, the announcers
played by the professors from the first
two seasons explain the entire tournament
system. For those of you
just now joining us, the show
pauses to tell you how the entire
system works. Again, exposition,
guys. That's just not how you do it.
If this is your first time watching,
allow us to break down the rules.
They're explaining this in the middle
of the fight at the worst possible time
to be explaining it. In fact, look at how
even worse done this is when you realize
it's being done diegetically. Imagine
watching the tournament on TV when
during a fight that is currently
underway, the announcers interrupt
to tell you how the tournament works.
In case people who've never seen the tournament
before just tuned in,
there are infinite other ways of conveying
this information to the audience, and they chose
now in this incredibly clunky
way?
If you're just joining us, the objective of golf
is to get the ball in the hole
in as few strokes as possible.
Points are tabulated by the amount of strokes
under par, and remember, it's the lowest
score that wins. Oh, it appears
Jimmy has finished the course while I was
talking. So the exposition is about as well
done as it's always been. The fights also
feel written now. Much more
emphasis is placed on dialogue
and specific moves than
before, which slows things down
and really messes with the pace. If you're
just joining us, one of the big problems with the
first two volumes was the constant influx
of new characters who aren't on screen
enough for you to learn anything interesting about them
or care but manage to suck up enough
screen time that the actual characters
don't have room to breathe. Remember how
Neptune's entire relevance to the story of the
show was that Weiss wanted to go to the prom
with him and how after that I never
had to bring him up again? So all the
screen time that went into him was a waste, wasn't
it? The writers have noticed this problem
and decided the solution is to add a hundred
million more characters. Since it's the
tournament arc now, just like in real
animes, we get new teams to throw
into the story for our other characters we
kinda know to fight against, and
you know exactly which ones you won't
see in fights because they're just 2D
concept art. But that's not all!
We also have more characters who
are just here now.
Winter Schnee, Weiss' sister,
is here to not do much of anything
and just kinda turn up for a couple
episodes to give Weiss a pep talk
and explain for the benefit of the audience
how their semblance works. To Weiss,
the only other person who already
knows how it fucking works!
Oh, and also to have a pointless fight with Crow,
another character who has finally turned
up after getting name-dropped a bunch
in previous seasons. Here's a thing you probably
noticed by now, but every character is usually
named for a fairy tale character of some kind
like Ruby is Red Riding Hood, Nora
is Thor, Jean Arc is Joan
of Arc, Blake is fucking
bad, and Crow, Glinda,
Ozpin, the General, and some others
are based vaguely after characters from
the Wizard of Oz. Anyway, the gimmick is wearing
so thin now that they're really
struggling to come up with characters that fit
this scheme. In one of the fights, Yang and Weiss
fight against Neon Cat,
a Faunus character inspired by
Nyan Cat, and Flint Coal, the son
of a dust store owner who Weiss' family
wait, Flint Coal?
This is like the second black
character in the show and his name is
Flint Coal!
Oh, no! Okay, so
it's not as bad as it sounds. It's actually
a clever, clever reference
to Rooster Teeth's Minecraft
Let's Play.
Dude, I got Coal and Flint?
Oh, you're set. That'd be a cool name.
Flint Coal. Would it though? Yeah, you'd be like
a, like an international private investigator
mystery type. You'd have to be black though, right?
I dig it.
What's his weapon called anyway?
You see, all the characters' weapons have names.
They get mentioned in behind-the-scenes material
or named in the show. Crescent Rose.
One of the most... Mertonaster.
Gambol! Shrow?
But Flint Coal. Flint
Coal doesn't appear in
many other RWBY materials, so
we've not had an opportunity to learn his
weapon's name, so the RWBY wiki
has had no choice but
to list it as
Weapon Trumpet!
Ha ha ha ha!
Ha ha ha ha!
But the thing about season three is that it
gets good. Midway through this volume,
the plot of RWBY
starts. The main characters take
Pyrrha aside and say, hey, so what's actually
happening here is there are four maidens?
Women with incredible magical
powers. Not like semblances or dust.
They're not magic. This is real magic.
Each time a maiden dies, someone else inherits
the maiden's power. Oh, so it's just
Avatar again? Really? Okay.
Each of the maidens represents one of the
four seasons. It's the four seasons,
not the four elements, so it's not like Avatar.
Oh, hang on. There's four different elements
of dust, aren't there? Wow, it's Avatar all the
way down, isn't it? It's really boring,
and the rules of who gets to be a maiden and why
are really silly, and the exposition of it
is bad, but it's not that bad because
the show has now introduced Crow.
How does the power choose?
Through a series of stupid and
convoluted rules. The writers made
the genuinely clever decision to have
him annoyed and bored by
most of the characters and plot of RWBY.
Did you miss me? Did you miss me?
No.
Crow spends half the show ridiculing
all the characters that have been taking themselves
seriously for hours with no one questioning
them before. If you were one of my men,
I would have you shot. If I was one of
your men, I'd shoot myself.
So even if you aren't really enjoying
the story or the ridiculous amount of plot
being dumped in your lap regarding
the maidens and Cinder, the real
villain of the last two seasons who hasn't done
much, who it turns out actually has
stolen half of a maiden's power and
might inherit the other half if the maiden dies,
it's not so bad because another
character in the scene isn't enjoying
it either. It's ironic that everyone else
is birdbrained. So it turns out
that the story's really always been about
these four maidens, each representing
one of the four seasons and Cinder
wanting to cause enough commotion that
she can get to the fall maiden and kill
her to ensure she gets her power.
There's some pretty genuine drama now as Pyrrha
is offered the choice to take the maiden's soul
into her body, a process which will probably
kill her but prevent the power falling
into the wrong hands. A character has to choose
between having her own life and
doing what might be the right thing for
the world. Pyrrha is actually given
an identity and questions
and important choices to explore
outside of her relationship to Jaune
and it makes her the strongest character
in the show. It makes it easier to ignore
that the plot is basically yet another avatar
thing. There being people with magical
powers whose abilities go to someone else
when they die is very avatar
adjacent, but you don't even think about it
because the exposition gets made fun of by
one character and another character has to make
a real choice about it, so it actually
works. One of Cinder's goons,
Emerald, has the power to make people hallucinate
and makes Yang think her guy's attacking
her after a round has ended, and while
she thinks she's defending herself, the rest of the world
sees what's actually happening, which is Yang
breaking a guy's fucking leg
for no reason. Don't worry. He's a villain
and he's in on it and he has robot legs,
so it's fine, but no one knows he has robot legs
so this causes a lot of unrest among
the people watching and everyone seeing it on TV
and fear and anxiety attract
Grimm, so they all start ominously moving
toward the city and Yang's freaking
the fuck out because she thinks she's losing her
mind and everyone's mad at her. It's like
plot! There's plot happening, guys!
Everybody, wake up! The characters
finally have to do something!
Then, right after, while Pyrrha and Penny
are fighting in the tournament, Emerald makes Pyrrha
see way worse attacks coming, which
causes her to really push her power
and the tiny wires all Penny's weapons
are attached to wrap around Penny
and Penny, the character we've known
for a whole season plus, like, five seconds
at the end of volume one, is torn
to pieces. I mean,
holy shit! She's a robot
so it's not like a disembowelment
but this was a character and she's
dead. It's fucked up.
Everyone goes wild.
Cinder hacks the main frame
and gives a speech about humans
bad and a million billion Grimm
descend on the city and school
and the last hour of volume three starts
with a fucking bang. Everything
bad is happening to everyone
everywhere all the time. A main character
is fucking dead in pieces.
People are crying. This isn't your daddy's
generic and then bad guys attack the
city. This isn't volume two shit.
The city is being destroyed.
Caligula gets broken out of the prison
he was locked in at the end of season two and
starts hacking the army robots and blowing
ships out of the sky. Everything's
happening. Everyone's fucked.
Bring them to their knees.
The civil rights protesters still talk
like they're fucking evil but, I mean, generally
it's pretty good. Ruby's threatening a giant
bird with one of Penny's swords because she's
too distraught to think straight and
then it flies at her and everyone's
lockers ram into it and pin it to the ground
and everyone we've seen so far turns up
to fight. Look, even Weapon Trumpet
is here. This absolutely incredible
shot was done by Dylan Gu. It's
my favorite shot in the show. Just
narrowly edging out the Zwei attack
and there's great setup and payoff to it because
we've known since volume one that characters
can call their lockers to them to get their
weapon out whenever they want it. So having them be
used as weapons and just smash into this
thing all at once, it's just so great.
So everyone's fighting monsters. There's some
great action. Ruby fights, uh,
check Malcolm McDowell's IMDb
for another comical name.
The real world is
cold! And he's kicking her and giving
a speech about the world being a cruel, cold
place. As for me,
I'll do what I do best.
Survive!
And he's fucking dead.
They just killed him! He's dead! I mean, holy
shit, right? They're destroying the main
setting of the story so far and
killing off villains in the process.
It's great! For a few short
episodes, the show isn't like Avatar
or anything else on its homework list.
You're briefly glimpsing what it looks like
when it's trying to be itself
when it's being Ruby.
You know this is why the rest of the show
is so frustrating, right? Because every now and
then something like this happens and you
wanna see the show this stuff came from.
Ruby opens Neo's umbrella and the wind
fucking blows her off the ship
they're flying on hundreds of feet in the air.
She's dead! She's fucking
dead! Until people start to get bored
with the show and realize that most of
the new characters are really boring. Maybe you
weren't supposed to assume the fall was gonna
kill her, but she doesn't appear for like
three more seasons after this.
So either the writers had intended to kill
her and then changed her minds because they wanted the character
back or they just forgot she existed for
literally fucking years.
Blake gets attacked and stabbed
by Adam and he shares his incredibly good
motivation for his actions. Uh,
I'm bad and I'm going to kill you
and Yang tries to help but Adam cuts
her arm off. This moment is still so
dramatic and visually done so
well. They fake out for a second that
Blake's head gets cut off but actually
it was one of these illusions and she gets away
but what's amazing about this part of this show
is that for a second I believed
that they might, they just might
actually kill one of the four
main characters. Like, if that's not proof
that this show is onto something story-wise
for a hot minute, I don't know what is. Seeing
Pyrrha trying to do the right thing while
living with the fact she just accidentally
killed one of her friends and seeing that
affect her thinking is actually
incredible and from a character perspective
it's the best stuff you'll ever see in this show.
It would have been really helped if Pyrrha
and Penny had actually been friends
or like on screen together
basically at all before the fight
where Penny dies.
It's an honor to finally meet you.
Like, at this point it's actively offensive
like how poorly spent
the time leading up to this fight is
and just how much better it could have been.
If they'd, like, given these characters a relationship
before one of them killed the other
like wouldn't that have been meaningful?
Salutations, Pyrrha Nekos.
Do you remember when she said salutations?
Do you remember?
Pyrrha decides to let herself become
the vessel for the previous maiden but they're
too late and Cinder kills the maiden
and then Pyrrha shoves Miles into his locker
where he belonged.
I mean, Pyrrha sends Jaune away
against his will so he can survive
but not before fully confessing her feelings
and kissing him and tries to take Cinder on
but she fails and gets shot in the heart
by an arrow.
Ruby turns up just too late to save her
and watches as Cinder dissolves
Pyrrha's body into nothing.
Jesus fucking Christ!
They are not messing around pretending this is a show
for kids anymore, are they?
And then Ruby goes,
"[screams in pain"]
and turns out to have a magic power
because she has silver eyes and this means
she can instantly kill Grimm or something.
I don't know.
You learn about this power existing right now
seven hours into the show.
It's not great,
but we've already talked about how weird that is.
On the whole, the absolute chaos
and world-changing events and the treatment
of characters and emotionally interesting
story moves that take place in the last
four-and-a-bit episodes of volume three
make it briefly a great show, pure and simple,
and this is a weird place to end a video
about the problems with a show
by talking about how good it was for a while
and how promisingly it left its doors open,
but this is really why talking about Ruby
is so artistically interesting because it's always
on the cusp of being good like this,
and sometimes it really is,
but that's also why the show is such a disappointment.
That part of season three damns
the rest of the surrounding show even more
by telling you to have expectations
because for a second,
you can see how good it really could be.
The show hasn't got good exactly.
It's just had a really good time
making serious changes to the status quo of the story,
but you can't sustain a story on Red Weddings alone.
The new story beginning with volume four onwards
has to actually be good for this to all work out,
and ultimately, it doesn't.
To really explore the more specific problems
with volumes four onwards, we'd need a whole other video.
I wanted to talk in specific about the first three seasons
because they stand out as the time the show seemed
most likely to be going somewhere
and therefore feel particularly bad
when they only do it for such brief bursts
in Monty's fights, in the promising storylines
or character moments that get forgotten or dropped,
and in the way they really satisfyingly
did things with Pyrrha's character,
but now that character is gone,
so the show's back to having dozens of characters
with barely one interesting personality between them.
The good parts of the show really can be great,
and because of this, all the bad parts
are worse than bad.
They're also a shame.
♪
Creating art is like jumping off a cliff
and building your wings on the way down.
If you want to only start when you know
exactly how to get everything right,
you never actually will.
You never really know what you're doing
until after you've started doing it.
In the past couple of years of this weird life,
I've met quite a few people who knew Monty,
and several of them have told me the same story.
He'd say that he felt like the first season,
first season and a half, first two seasons,
based on who was telling it,
weren't turning out super great so far,
but it didn't matter if it was bad right now
because in his mind, the whole thing,
the act of creation itself even,
was a process of learning.
If you can really figure out how to make something,
really get the production and workflow down,
figure out what works in the writing,
and through this process find the core
of what this thing you're making is really supposed to be,
it won't matter how bad it started out
because where it went will be great.
There's a certain manic energy,
a compelling power in these early seasons of RWBY.
Even if you're having a bad time,
you feel pulled along, like you just wanna see
how it ends up.
This tone will change.
As the show continues to be written and paced
in frustrating ways and cheat off the answers
on its anime homework and its most interesting,
unique aspects are continuously downplayed or ignored,
it becomes more and more clear
that you'll never see the show become itself.
I didn't watch Monty Oum's RWBY
to see Miles Luna's avatar,
but that's what people are getting.
If the creators of RWBY had started learning
from their mistakes and taken to heart
the good faith criticisms the people
who wanted to love their show were making,
RWBY could have really been something,
but instead it'll be remembered by a majority of people
as a series of really good trailers
with some really strange dialogue,
some really cool fight scenes to watch
out of context on YouTube,
and inexplicably quite good episodes
at the end of the third season.
The real shame of RWBY is everyone whose work goes unsung
because it's in a show that sucks.
People like Shane Neuville who left the show
and released a massive open letter
detailing his feelings about the company's treatment
of the show after Monty's passing,
or Harley Dwartz who contributes a lot
to making some of the best parts of the show,
or the many other animators and artists
who are still to this day putting time
and effort and attention into things
that get ignored or thrown away
or just executed terribly
because the storytelling isn't there.
It's clear that a lot of really skilled artists
and animators work on RWBY to this day,
but the mishandling of the show's story
and production means that it fails
to reflect their talents, and that is probably
the worst thing a show can do.
It's important to talk about this show
and where it went wrong because while this is
the first attempt to make an animated web series
of basically anything like this scale,
it won't necessarily be the last,
and that means we have to learn all the lessons
we can from its production problems
and failures or we'll see them get repeated again.
I want there to be a show one day
that represents what RWBY could have been,
and that means recognizing the show's potential
and where it went wrong.
RWBY will probably never be the show
it promised to be, but with the gift
of learning the lessons it has to teach,
maybe something else can be.
Thank you very much for watching.
♪ ♪
There's a video on his channel about the process of making it
which is super great and you should check that out as well.
Note to self, have the YouTube pop-up thing do that now.
I don't know what it's called.
I talked about some serious issues in this video
and it didn't feel right monetizing a video
while talking about real-world problems like that.
I was going to announce in the Faunus chapter
that I was gonna give the ad revenue
from this video to a bail fund,
but rooster teeth can be very strange
about copyright and monetization
and I don't want to make a promise I can't keep.
I'll post an update if we end up being able to do that.
Thanks a lot and, yeah, I love you.
♪ ♪
♪
