Pluto, planet or not?
Before we can answer this question we need to know what the word planet is for and that
takes us back to the ancient Greeks who called Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, the
Moon and the Sun planets.
Basically if it moved across the sky and was bright it was a planet.
This is a terrible start for the word because 1.
It excludes Earth from the list and 2.
It groups wildly different things together.
But the Greeks couldn't know how different the moon was from Saturn because the best
technology they had to observe the universe was sadly limited.
It would take several thousand years until the industrious Dutch made the first telescopes
and astronomy became much more interesting.
Astronomers could now confidently rearrange the solar system, an elegant scientific advance
that no one could possibly object to, and reclassify its parts dropping the Sun and
the Moon from the list of planets and adding Earth.
Now if it orbited the Sun it was a planet.
As time went on and telescopes got better and better each new century brought with it
the discovery of a new planet.
Which brings us to this familiar solar system, 9 planets orbiting one star.
Looking at this model makes people wonder why do astronomers want to ditch Pluto?
The problem is pictures like this in textbooks are lies.
Well not lies exactly but unhelpful.
They give the impression that the planets are similar-ish in size and evenly-ish spaced
but the reality couldn't be more different.
Here dear Terrans is our home planet Earth and this is Jupiter next to it at the correct
scale.
Rather bigger than you probably thought.
If we take this diagram and adjust for the correct sizes of the planets it looks like
this.
If you're watching the video in full screen HD mode you might not be even able to see
Pluto.
So size differences are vast and Pluto is the smallest by far.
But it's not just small for a planet it's also smaller than 9 moons.
Triton, Europa, our own moon, Io, Callisto, Titan and Ganymede.
Even if you show the correct relative sizes the distances are still a problem.
Think about it, if Jupiter was this close to Earth it wouldn't look like a dot in the
night sky but would be rather overwhelming.
So it must be really far away.
Which makes drawing it to scale rather a challenge.
If you want the length of a piece of paper to represent the distance from Mercury to
Pluto then giant Jupiter would be the size of a dust mite on that page and Pluto a bacterium.
But excluding Pluto from the planet club just for being tiny and small isn't reason enough
and quickly brings out the Pluto defenders.
In order to understand what Pluto really is we need to first discuss a planet you've never
heard of.
Ceres.
Back in 1801 astronomers found a new planet in the huge gap between Mars and Jupiter.
It was a small planet but they loved it anyway and named it Ceres.
And next year astronomers found another small planet in the same area and named it Pallas.
A few years later they found a third one, Juno.
And then funnily enough a fourth one, Vesta.
And for several decades children learned the 11 planets of the solar system.
But astronomers kept finding more and more of these objects and became increasingly uncomfortable
calling them planets because they were much more like each other than the planets on either
side.
So a new category was born, asteroids in the asteroid belt.
And the tiny planets were relabeled which is why you've never heard of them.
And it was a good decision too as astronomers have now found hundreds of thousands of asteroids
which would be a lot for a kid to memorize if they were all still planets.
Back to Pluto.
It was discovered in 1930 making it the then 9th planet.
First estimates put Pluto about the size of Neptune but with more observations that was
revised down and down and down.
While Pluto shrank astronomers started to find other, similar objects orbiting in the
same zone.
Sound familiar?
While school kids kept memorizing the 9 planets some astronomers grew uneasy about including
Pluto because the size estimates continued to shrink.
They learned that Pluto is made mostly of ice and they continued to find lots and lots
of icy objects at the edge of the solar system just like Pluto.
This problem could be ignored as long as no one found an ice ball bigger than Pluto.
Which is exactly what happened in 2006 with the discovery of Eris.
Once again astronomers re-categorized the solar system and grouped these distant objects
including Pluto into a new area called the Kuiper belt.
And that's the story of Pluto, a miscategorized planet that finally found its home.
Just like Ceres.
But this story is really less about Pluto than it is about realizing the word planet
isn't very helpful.
The first 4 planets are nothing at all like the next 4 so it's even a little weird to
group these 8 together which is why they often aren't and are separated into terrestrial
planets and gas giants.
And now that we have telescopes that can see planets around stars not our own and we've
found rogue planets drifting in empty space and brown dwarfs, objects that blur the very
line between planet and star, the word planet becomes even less clear.
So as we increase our knowledge of the universe the category of planet will probably continue
to evolve or possibly fall out of favor entirely.
But for the time being the best way to categorize the stuff in our solar system is into one
star, 8 planets, 4 terrestrial, 4 gas giants, the asteroid belt and the distant Kuiper belt
home to Pluto.
