Has another year really passed so quickly?
Yes, it's time to vote for the winner of this year's coveted Golden Crocoduck.
Last year, of course, I had to suspend the Golden Crocoduck.
I'll have more to say about that later.
First, to this year's nominees.
You've seen them highlighted in my videos throughout the year,
and here they all are together.
OK, biologically speaking, is that normal to do some of the things that are done?
No.
Crazy, I'm crazy for feeling so weak.
According to evolutionists and Darwinians,
that gene would be considered a weak gene in survival of the fittest.
So you know how long it would take for the homosexuals
to be wiped off the face of the Earth forever to be extinct?
One generation.
You go back about 1.3 billion years, now you've
got a serious problem, because the moon is skimming the surface of the Earth.
In the very first verse of Bible, we find a remarkable piece of evidence
of supernatural authorship.
I'm crazy for trying and crazy for crying.
This, let's say the sun is orbiting around the Earth,
then it's going to, over time, it's going to get out of balance,
and it's going to switch places.
The sun will wind up in the middle.
What?
The orbital Earth vehicle, which it is not, it is not moving.
I'm crazy for trying and crazy for crying.
In an interview with Ben Stein for the movie Expelled,
he stated quite clearly that no one knows how life started,
and that there's a real possibility that life on this planet
may have been seeded or influenced by higher forms of life.
Ah, what a wonderful collection of video clips.
I've had to disqualify Gorilla 199 because of a possible medical condition.
I know, often hard to tell with people who speak to invisible beings,
but in this case, I had good reason to believe the condition is genuine.
BT 3701's nomination also caused quite a bit of controversy.
Although this was clearly a disingenuous piece of nonsense,
he did label it as satire after I told him he'd been nominated for a Golden Crocoduck.
So I'll accept that as the equivalent of admitting an error and coming clean,
and take him off the final voting list.
I was hoping to have Harun Yahya in this year's line-up.
His Atlas of Creation was nominated for a Golden Crocoduck,
but unfortunately my video on him isn't ready in time,
so rather than hurry it and do a half-baked job,
I've decided to hold it over until next year.
Likewise, a few other contenders whose nominations arrived too late for this year.
Voting will take place on this website,
the URL of which is noted in the video description.
Feel free to campaign on behalf of your favourite candidates in this forum
and discuss the merits of the various nominees.
Voting closes on the 14th of October,
allowing me two weeks to prepare an awards video.
The winner, as always, will be announced on October 28th.
That's the feast day of St Jude Thaddeus, the patron saint of lost causes.
Now a word about the suspension of the competition last year,
because a lot of people seem very unclear about the rules.
The Golden Crocoduck is awarded for the biggest breach of the 9th commandment
in pursuit of the creationist cause.
If someone admits he or she was simply ignorant,
then that's not a breach of the 9th commandment,
so the nomination is ineligible.
That happened with Stone Commander, and last year it happened with Aminakin.
It's not given for the false filing of DMCAs
or being the stupidest or the meanest or the suckiest creationist of the month.
Because, fun as it is, there is of course a serious side to the Golden Crocoduck.
It's designed to show that the only way creationists can argue their case scientifically is to lie,
and the competition draws attention to this deception.
And while we're on the subject, a lot of people seem confused about what's acceptable
and what's not on my comments fora.
I said I had to remove several racist comments that came out of the Aminakin controversy,
and a lot of people seem to think I can't tell the difference between a comment
that's critical of religion and one that's plainly racist.
Just to clarify, I hardly ever remove comments,
and when I do, I always post a message explaining why I've removed one.
And these get removed so rarely.
I think I operate one of the freest and most open channels on YouTube.
Clearly comments that are critical of religion aren't removed
because you'll find them posted all over my channel,
and that includes comments that are critical of Islam.
You can refer to Muslims as idiots, gullible, deluded, whatever.
That's not racist.
Calling them Untermenschen, well, that's getting close to the line.
This was a Nazi term that meant subhuman.
But calling them sand n****s is stepping over the line.
And although I don't like it, I also tolerate personal abuse in the interests of free speech.
I wouldn't use language like that myself because it's not an intelligent argument,
but it is someone's opinion.
But posting a message that says I'd like to c*** on her face is not intelligent,
it's not an argument, and it's not even much of an opinion,
just a pornographic fantasy by some sad individual.
So that's one I deleted.
So this isn't a new policy,
and if you think these racist and pornographic comments are acceptable,
then I think you're on the wrong channel.
Several years ago, I posted a video called One Atheist's Creed
in which I outlined my beliefs
to counter the assertion that atheists have no beliefs.
And I think it's fitting to repost that now.
For those who are still subscribing and endorse these beliefs,
thank you.
I believe in being honest and compassionate towards others,
not because I'm told to or afraid of being punished if I don't,
but because I believe it's the right thing to do.
I believe it's wrong to discriminate against people based on race,
gender, religion, or sexual orientation.
I believe everyone has a right to freedom of speech and freedom of thought.
I believe adults have a responsibility to treat their children fairly
and to teach them a sense of right and wrong.
I will not believe in doctrines based on blind faith.
I will strive to keep an open mind and make deductions based on evidence.
I will not be dogmatic or unwilling to change my mind
if new evidence contradicts my understanding.
I will not fill gaps in knowledge with guesswork or blind belief.
I will not be afraid to say, I don't know.
I will oppose laws and policies based on religious dogma,
especially where they infringe on our rights and freedoms.
I will stand up against bigotry and injustice.
I will fight intolerance.
I will strive to bring the world together through our common humanity
and to end division over religious differences.
.
