There is a discrepancy between what the observations are showing, which shows about an average
of 0.13 degrees C per decade warming, which is a very small number, compared to the climate
models which are generally twice that at least.
My thanks to those who cited this interview with Roy Spencer a few weeks back, claiming
that global warming is far less than models predicted.
Actually, he's been saying the same thing for three decades, and in this video I'll
look at that claim. So let's start with whether measurements show that the Earth's temperature
is rising at 0.13 degrees C per decade. The answer is yes, if we only look at Roy Spencer
and John Christie's analysis of the satellite data at the University of Alabama at Huntsville,
If we look at all the other temperature monitoring bodies, they all show warming of about 0.18
degrees C per decade. If you think satellites are more reliable than ground stations, well
the analysis by the other satellite monitoring body, Remote Sensing Systems, that's the
purple line at the top, also shows warming of about 0.18 degrees C per decade.
Radiosonde balloons, which, like the satellites, are measuring temperatures in the lower troposphere,
show even higher rates of warming. And an average of all the tropospheric measurements,
including Spencer's UAH analysis, gives a warming trend of, again, 0.18 degrees C per
decade. And the temperature trend conforms pretty well to the predictions of the models.
Several independent studies have been done, and they've found a close match. The most
recent study, a 2020 analysis in Geophysical Research Letters, found that 14 out of 17
models closely matched observations for a given concentration of CO2. For a more detailed
explanation of their results, please see the video description with a link to the study.
All my sources are listed in the video description, along with links.
A couple of the models reviewed are more than twice the temperature trend Spencer calculated,
which would be over 0.26 degrees C per decade, but there's also one that's way under, so
it's very easy to cherry pick. But the fact is that most of the models match the actual
trend shown by every temperature dataset except Spencer's.
So the next question is, how reliable is Spencer's analysis?
The advantage to it is that it's from satellites and it covers the whole Earth. There's no
other temperature dataset that covers the whole Earth.
Actually, there is. There's the analysis by Remote Sensing Systems, which also gets its
data from the same satellite and covers the whole Earth. As we've seen, their results
don't agree with Spencer's. They agree much more closely with all the other temperature
measurements.
OK, then, maybe Spencer and his colleague, John Christie, have a much better track record
than anyone else in getting their temperature analysis right. And that's why we should
only trust their results and ignore all the others.
In fact, the opposite is true. In the 1990s, their temperature dataset was again out of
sync with all the others. Spencer claimed their satellite measurements – the line
at the bottom with the black dots – showed not a warming but a cooling trend of about
0.1 degrees C per decade in the tropics.
The graph they published showed the ground temperature data on the top line with a clear
warming trend.
When two researchers published evidence in 1997 that Spencer and Christie's observations
must be wrong, Spencer said there isn't a problem with the measurements that we can
find. And in a speech to the Competitive Enterprise Institute in 1997, he argued that his results
have an independent validation, which he said surface measurements don't.
As now, Spencer used his observations to argue that the warming predictions were wrong. He
said the models that originally predicted warming of around 0.3 degrees C per decade
but had now reduced that to 0.18 degrees. If that figure sounds familiar, we saw earlier
that that's not only the prediction of the models for actual CO2 concentration, it's
also the amount of warming measured by RSS and all the ground stations.
Spencer didn't disagree that CO2 is a greenhouse gas, but he argued that since the troposphere
wasn't warming as expected then nature must be getting rid of the excess heat, a temperature
stabilising mechanism.
It wasn't until 2005 that researchers at the other satellite analysis institute, RSS,
finally discovered the error in Spencer and Christie's calculations.
Put simply, the orbit of the temperature measuring satellite degrades over time. As a result,
daily temperatures get taken later and later in the day, which gives a false lower reading.
Spencer and Christie had adjusted their data to take account of this, but they'd made
a mathematical error. When the error was corrected, their temperature readings went from a flat
line of 0.087 to 0.19 degrees C per decade in line with everyone else, and in line with
the models, which Spencer himself had said predicted warming of around 0.18 degrees C
per decade.
Spencer later argued on his blog that this was only one error in 25 plus years. Actually,
there were others, but this was the most egregious, and it was a hugely important error because
the ambiguities set climate science back a decade, and it was one of the first claims
that launched the so-called sceptic movement on social media.
Now it was clear that the world was indeed warming, Spencer had to drop the argument
that weather systems were ridding the world of the excess heat caused by rising CO2 levels,
because clearly they weren't. But he still didn't want to drop his belief that the
earth must have some kind of natural self-regulating mechanism that would somehow stop the warming.
That idea doesn't work if carbon dioxide is responsible, because it would mean that temperatures
would keep going up as long as we keep adding CO2 to the atmosphere.
So he started looking around for some other reason for the warming. In 2008 he told a
Heritage Foundation conference there's probably a natural reason for it. In a blog contribution
that same year, he predicted that further research will reveal some other cause, maybe
the sun or a change in cloudiness, perhaps due to changes in the Pacific Decadal Oscillation.
But further research didn't show that. Solar physicists showed that solar activity was
falling so the sun couldn't be pushing global temperatures up, and further research showed
that for over 100 years there was no trend in the Pacific Decadal Oscillation compared
to the upward trend in global temperature. As for clouds, Spencer's argument was that
they're nature's sunshade, so if there's a decrease in cloud cover you get warming.
How could the experts have missed such a simple explanation, he asked?
Well they hadn't. Experts had done a huge amount of research into the cooling effect
of clouds. What they didn't miss was the fact that as well as being nature's sunshade, clouds
are also nature's blanket. They reflect shortwave energy from the sun back into space on top,
but also trap longwave radiation, heat energy, on Earth from below. What studies found was
that the warming effect is much more pronounced on high altitude clouds at night and at higher
latitudes and the cooling effect is greater with low altitude clouds during the day closer
to the tropics. Looking at both of these effects, and not just one, the net effect
of an increase in cloud cover is zero to slightly positive. So if anything, studies show a decrease
in cloud cover would cause a very slight cooling, not warming.
Spencer's belief that there's probably a natural reason for global warming and his feeling
that the Earth has a natural air conditioning process sounds like an article of faith, well
there's a good reason for that. Spencer has made no secret of his belief that God is directing
the climate. He's a member, and also on the advisory board, of an evangelical organisation
called the Cornwall Alliance that believes the Earth and its ecosystems, created by God's
intelligent design and infinite power and sustained by his faithful providence, are
robust, resilient, self-regulating and self-correcting. Earth's climate system is no exception.
Now there's nothing wrong with personal religious belief and millions of scientists around the
world are Christians, Jews, Hindus, Buddhists and Muslims who believe in all kinds of deities.
That's not the issue. The problem arises when a widely accepted scientific conclusion is
specifically precluded by that religious belief. When Spencer expounds his ideas of
some unknown self-regulating system keeping global warming in check in speeches, letters
to politicians, blogs and TV interviews, people assume he's talking as a scientist. They may
not be aware that what he's saying is indistinguishable from his religious doctrine that there must
be a self-regulating system because God would never let the climate warm beyond a comfortable
level. It's very clear to geologists, and this is my field, that the Earth does not
have a self-regulating system that keeps temperatures stable because they've gone much higher and
lower in the past. A million years ago there was a glaciation called the Calabrian with
ice sheets across most of the continents. Fifty million years ago there was what's called
a hot house or greenhouse period in the late Cretaceous. And before that a cool period.
And before that another greenhouse. And before that an ice age. And before that a greenhouse.
And before that an ice age. And before that, 500 million years ago, there was another greenhouse
with coral reefs near the North Pole. The range in temperatures between these extremes
is around 13 degrees centigrade. If you want to see why these changes have occurred, see
my video The History of the Earth in 33 Minutes. But even if you don't accept the scientific
explanation for these changes, the idea that there's a self-regulating mechanism or that
God or a force of nature would never let temperatures rise above 1 or 2 degrees centigrade is clearly
not supported by evidence from the past. Unless you believe the Earth's geological history
only goes back 6,500 years. But back to more recent history. No sooner
had Spencer and Christie's UAH satellite analysis been corrected than RSS had its own problems
with satellite data. Just like UAH in the 1990s, while every other data set showed warming,
RSS showed none, or even a slight cooling. Of course it was pretty obvious to climatologists
that there was something wrong with RSS's analysis. In his blog, Spencer wrote that
even his boss, John Christie, thought that the temperature recorded by RSS data was undergoing
spurious cooling. In other words, it's wrong. Most likely caused, again, by a decaying satellite
orbit. And Spencer added that those of you who really,
really need the global temperature record to show as little warming as possible might
want to consider jumping ship and switch from the UAH to the RSS data set. I'm sure
it was meant as a joke, but that's exactly what they did. Now that UAH had admitted the
world was indeed warming, and it was the RSS data that flatlined, suddenly it was the RSS
data set that was brought out every time the critics wanted to prove that global warming
had stopped. There's been no significant warming whatsoever.
The satellites show no global warming at all. Well, one analysis of the satellite data showed
no warming. The other satellite data analysis, by John Christie and Roy Spencer, did show
warming. Same with all the ground temperature data over the same period.
The same cherry-picked RSS graph was passed around blogs held up in congressional committee
hearings, featured in political reports, shown on TV, and wheeled out during political conferences,
until finally, in 2017, RSS found and published the source of its error.
As Christie and the other experts had predicted, when the faults were corrected, RSS data showed
a warming trend that matched the warming trend measured by everyone else. And it showed warming
of around, guess what, 0.18 degrees centigrade per decade for the last 35 years.
So why does satellite analysis, once lauded as the best data available, keep giving wrong
numbers? The problem is, there's just one satellite gathering data, and it isn't simply
pointing thermometers at the atmosphere and taking the temperature. The process is far
more complicated than that. It measures microwave radiance from oxygen atoms, and from that
researchers calculate the energy of the atoms. And from that energy, they calculate the temperature
of the atoms in that part of the troposphere using a model called the retrieval algorithm.
Then UAH subtracts what they estimate is the radiative effect from the ground. Finally,
they have to calculate the position of the satellite and adjust the data to take account
of its changing orbit. Spencer and Christie developed this model
back in the 1980s, and it was certainly a brilliant method of measuring the temperature
of the lower troposphere, in theory. But in practice, it's complicated and flawed,
and frequently underestimates global temperature trends.
If any conspiracy theorists think that this is just a plot by scientists to change data
they don't like, I should point out that Spencer and Christie themselves have published corrections
in 1992, 1994, 1997, 1998, 2003 and 2004. Each time they made a correction, it adjusted
the actual tropospheric temperature higher. They also accepted the major error found by
RSS in 2005, and they accepted the revision RSS made to its own faulty data in 2017.
So given the track record of satellite analysis, it's not a huge surprise that UAH temperature
measurements have again been drifting below all the others. That's why it's misleading
to report this as the actual temperature trend, and ignore all the others.
Apart from his belief that there should be a negative feedback system to counteract global
warming, Spencer's other argument is, or rather was, that the main positive feedback
anticipated by researchers wouldn't happen. That's an increase in water vapour.
The models predict that as more CO2 is added to the atmosphere, the amount of water vapour
in the atmosphere increases, because there's more evaporation and warmer air can hold more
water vapour. Since water vapour is a powerful greenhouse gas, that amplifies the warming.
Back in 1997, Spencer didn't disagree that water vapour is a powerful greenhouse gas,
and any increase could produce positive feedback. He just didn't think such an increase would
happen. But his prediction was wrong. Studies measuring
water vapour in the atmosphere over the next 20 years did find a change, an increase, just
as the models had predicted. This wasn't the only prediction Spencer's got wrong over
the years. Also, in 1997, he expressed little confidence we'd even see 1 to 1.5 degrees
of warming by the end of this century. But we've already seen a 1 degree centigrade
rise in line with the models, and it's only 2022.
In 2012, he predicted this. We may see very little warming in the future.
That prediction was also wrong. Even Spencer's own data showed continued warming, just as
the models had predicted. And, as he admitted on his blog, all of the next six years were
warmer than 2012, and four of them were the warmest ever recorded.
As more and more of his predictions failed, and increasingly the warming we're seeing
matched the predictions of the models, it became harder for Spencer to claim there was
no warming, or that CO2 wasn't the cause. So his position has shifted over the last
25 years. Regarding tropospheric temperatures, he moved
from claiming there's a cooling trend, and it's unlikely temperatures will increase even
1 to 1.5 degrees centigrade by the end of this century, to an admission that it was
actually warming faster than that, and then to a claim that we'd see no more warming,
and then to an admission that there was more warming, and last year, an assertion that
warming will reach 1.5 to 2 degrees centigrade when CO2 concentration doubles, late in the
21st century. As for carbon dioxide, in the 1990s he argued
that it wasn't causing any warming because nature was getting rid of the excess heat.
In 2008, after his temperature measurements were shown to be wrong, he said the warming
was nothing to do with CO2. Four years later, he said this.
I think that most of the warming we've seen could well be natural.
Or to put it another way, I think some of that warmth is due to the
CO2 we're producing. And a few seconds later, it goes up to half.
I think about half of it's natural. A year later in his blog, he changed that
to, could be mostly human caused. So over the last 25 years, Spencer's temperature
predictions have slowly risen from negligible warming to almost match published estimates.
And his view about the role of carbon dioxide in this warming have moved up from none to
some to half to most. Despite doing numerous TV and vlog interviews,
no one seems to have noticed this subtle shift in position over the last 25 years or asked
Spencer about it. So this brings us back to where we started.
Far from failing, the climate models have proved to be remarkably accurate, while Spencer's
predictions pretty much all failed. Spencer has had to change his position several
times to keep up and has moved closer and closer to the published science.
So will he take that extra last step? My prediction is that he can't.
If he accepts that the increase in CO2 concentration is responsible for recent warming, that would
go against his fundamental religious belief that God is in charge of the climate.
And if he accepts that a doubling of CO2 concentration will lead to a rise of around 3 degrees centigrade
and keep rising as we burn more fossil fuels, then his doctrine that God has given the Earth
a self-regulating climate is dead. Abandoning a scientific conclusion in the
face of overwhelming contrary evidence is easy. Abandoning a fundamental religious belief
seems to be much, much harder.
For more UN videos visit www.un.org
