Oh shit, am I screen recording?
How do I turn this off?
Look away.
Everyone look away.
Don't look at this.
Oh.
Looks like Behring has a video called YouTube's Coolest Trans Chick.
Huh.
That's kind of weird.
Behring's videos are usually anti-SJW screeds, where he mocks feminists for being fat and
ugly and dumb and retarded and gay and fat and dumb and retarded and fat.
He's not the kind of YouTuber I'd guess would be down with the whole trans thing.
But maybe I'm wrong.
Let's watch it and give him a chance.
But first I gotta do something.
Right, so Behring's video.
Let's take a look.
Yesterday I caught up with Blaire White, YouTube's most awesome trans chick and fellow anti-feminist
shitlord.
Oh, Blaire White.
I've seen her videos before.
She showed up on YouTube a few months ago and made an interesting video about how being
perceived as a beautiful, young, skinny, white cis woman actually gave her certain privileges
that she didn't have when she was perceived as a man.
Then she made another interesting video where she recalled witnessing an entire feminist
psychology class laugh at a male student who had just shared his story of being physically
and emotionally abused by his girlfriend.
I know from experience that this kind of thing really does happen in some feminist
circles and I think it's important to call it out as the vile and shameful offense that
it is.
So I'm grateful to Blaire for stepping up and for having made those first two genuinely
provocative videos.
But in the videos she's made since, she kind of jumped on the feminism is cancer bandwagon
and I lost interest after that.
But anyway, let's see what she has to say to Behring.
Tell me, what is your take on the bathroom talk, North Carolina, all that shit?
I think it's a huge mess.
I think that people tend to care about it a whole lot more than trans people actually
do.
In my mind, if you're trans and you're really making an effort to look the part and to live
the life, then you're not going to have that issue regardless.
So if you're really making the effort to look the part, then it's no problem that North
Carolina legally requires you to use the bathroom corresponding to the sex on your birth certificate.
Well, that's not much solace to trans people who are still transitioning or who are unable
to present as cis due to their bone structure or other limitations.
Pleasure wreath Simon ain't cheap kids.
It's also no use to people who shun conventional gender presentation of their own volition.
But I already knew that Blair doesn't care for that sort of person.
Do you get much discrimination on say YouTube or in your day to day life?
I mean, how much heat do you get for being transgender?
Almost none.
I don't begin all my sentences with as a trans person, as a trans woman, as a transgender
girl.
Like that's not what it is.
Like, I just live my life.
It's really not even a thought.
I guess I kind of remember when I'm taking my hormones, but other than that I don't think
about it.
Well, it's pretty easy to not think about it when the world treats you like a cis person.
But I am lucky enough that I can enter most public spaces and the world does interact
with me as a woman, not as a trans person or as a man.
So I do think that I am in a position to discuss female privilege as it's afforded to cis women.
I'm glad that Blair doesn't face much discrimination for being trans, but I kind of suspect that
part of what Baring finds cool about Blair is that she isn't a victim.
Blair has said in other videos that she's trying to get away from the victim mentality.
The farther I get into my transition, the farther I stray away from that victim mentality.
And I think this is an understandable urge.
I don't like thinking about myself as a victim either.
I like to think that I'm strong and beautiful and nubile and in control of every situation
except when I choose not to be.
But it's a lot easier to get away from the victim mentality when you're not a victim.
Also we should recognize that fighting for fair treatment is not the same as having a
victim mentality.
Blair recognizes that trans people are subjected to a disproportionate amount of violence and
discrimination.
I am transgender so that does affect the rate at which I may or may not experience violence.
Violence does be at trans people at alarmingly high rates.
Doesn't that mean that trans activists have a legitimate cause and shouldn't be dismissed
as a bunch of whiny SJW crazies?
I'm not saying that's what Blair thinks, but I am saying that it's the subtext of her video
with Baring, where Baring seems to admire her for not complaining about anything and
for responding with giggles when he asks questions that a lot of people might consider rude.
How long did it take to start going titties?
What's the deepest voice you can do?
What's the deepest voice I can do?
Did you tuck your old fall between your thighs or did you...
When I was in high school and I got like a bus phone up, I used to do this thing where
I could put it up.
You know, most of the trans people I know don't like it when us cis folks ask them about
their junk.
A trans person once told me that since it would be rude to ask a cis person a question
about their genitals, I shouldn't do it to a trans person either, and that seemed to
make sense.
But now I'm not so sure.
Now that I've been enlightened by Blair and Baring, maybe the next time I see a trans
person I'll say,
Hey tits, when did you get your pecker snipped?
And then if she gets mad I'll say,
Can't you take a joke you SJW bitch?
Get back in your safe space.
Am I cool yet guys?
Come on, tell me I'm cool.
I guess what's cool about Blair is that she's not easily offended, and in an age where everyone
is eager to take offense, even a man trying to cuck like me finds it kind of refreshing
when someone just doesn't give a shit.
And now you have this wonderful faggot!
That's what happens!
You okay?
We good?
Yeah?
Yeah.
Darling, you can call me what you like.
Oh okay, there we go.
Cool.
But the problem is that this sort of implies that trans people who complain about discrimination
or who take offense to impertinent questions are not cool.
It's like Baring is telling trans people,
You guys are cool in my book, but only as long as you look pretty, play by my rules,
don't complain about oppression and injustice, and don't get offended when I ask you about
your tits.
For Baring and the troglodyte faction of his audience, the perfect trans person is a person
who challenges as few of their preconceptions as possible, who never asks them to consider
their own privileges or rethink any of their prejudices.
And it's also just a lot easier for most people to accept a person who looks like this than
a person who looks like this.
But that's a point that's already been made pretty well.
By Blair White.
And while these are sort of frivolous examples, I do think there's something worth noting
about the quality of life that women experience based on operating through a society that's
just kinder to them, that's just more polite to them, that's just more welcoming of them.
I think this is worth noting, even if they are small things, because over the course
of a woman's life, I do think it affects their quality of life.
You leave the house and people are smiling at you and opening doors for you and genuinely
concerned with your well-being, it does make you a happier person.
I do think this is a privilege.
But Baring and Blair don't seem to think it's worth the effort to be nice to people who
are weird or different or retarded or fat.
And I know that I don't get to speak on behalf of trans people.
I'm not trans and I don't know what it's like to be trans.
I'm just an old-fashioned cross-dressing pervert, like J. Egger Hoover or Rocky Balboa.
I'm one of the ones who actually shouldn't be allowed in women's bathrooms.
Geez, I guess this is all kind of complicated, huh?
Makes me feel like I need a nap.
Good night.
You're a beautiful brown bear, Baring.
A big beautiful brown bear.
Where I come from, things happen to bears like you, Baring.
Bad things.
Real bad things.
What was I saying?
Oh right, I don't get to speak for trans people.
But I want to be polite and accepting towards trans people, and it seems like the best way
to do that is to treat them the way they say they want to be treated.
I've been given some standard advice, like don't ask questions about genitals, don't
use words like tranny or shemale, don't call human beings it, and that sort of thing.
But when I venture into the YouTube manosphere, it's a whole different universe.
In my last video, I suggested that maybe it's not the best idea to tell transgender teenagers
to drink poison when you disagree with them.
But transgender YouTuber Persephone66 left a comment on that video telling me that I
disrespected her by inadvertently suggesting that trans people needed to be coddled and
infantilized.
She also told me to get fucked in the urethra with a blowtorch.
OWWWWW.
I guess I don't have all the answers.
I can only do my best with the information I'm given.
And while I certainly don't claim to be a spokesperson for trans people, I don't think
that Blair White can be that spokesperson either.
It's pretty clear to me why Baring and his followers like her.
The woman is a downright sexy men's rights activist.
What's for a shitlord not to like?
But when the largest survey of trans people ever conducted reports that 78% of participants
have been harassed because of their gender identity, to treat a woman who by her own
admission has never faced any discrimination at all as anything but an exception to the
rule seems, well, kinda dumb and gay and retarded and faggot ass and gay and dumb and fat.
That's right, Baring.
I said fat.
I mean, just look at yourself.
You're a big round bear, Baring.
Here's the big round furry bear!
If you liked this video, please like, share, and subscribe.
If you didn't like it, please leave a comment telling me what a gay-ass retarded white night
man-gina cuck I am, ya fuckin' ding-dongs.
