Four hundred million years ago, this was a cauldron of exploding volcanoes and molten
lava. A few million years later, a shallow tropical sea appeared and laid down this bed
of limestone. None of which would really matter to anyone today, except for the fact that
this is Flodden Field, the site of one of the bloodiest battles in British history.
But how did a volcanic eruption four hundred million years ago help defeat one of the strongest
armies ever to invade England? And why did the formation of the Ardennes Mountains in
Belgium cause the death of the King of Scotland and change the course of British history?
In this series, we are going to look at how environments far back in time, millions of
years before humans appeared on Earth affected the outcome of battles and changed human history.
The type of rock an army found itself fighting on was sometimes a matter of design, but often
it was pure chance. And if the right type of environment had laid down the right type
of rock, it gave the underdog an unwitting victory.
The underdog at the Battle of Flodden five hundred years ago was Henry VIII's army of
around 26,000 men. Henry himself wasn't even there. He was off fighting in France and he
left the elderly Earl of Surrey in charge of what remained of his forces in England,
with strict instructions not to trust the Scots.
His potential adversary was James IV, a Renaissance king with a keen interest in science and culture
and an old-fashioned spirit of chivalry. A powerful ruler, James had united Scotland,
founded its navy, encouraged the first printing press and brought culture and prestige to
the nation. He even married Henry VIII's sister and signed a perpetual treaty of peace with
England. But when France came under attack, James felt honour-bound to strike a blow for
the old Scottish-French alliance. He assembled an army of over 30,000 men and crossed the
border here at the River Tweed.
The Scots sacked Norham Castle, the English fortress that overlooks the river. As they
marched south, other castles fell with barely a fight. Then James came up against two things.
One was Henry VIII's home army. The second was some serious Devonian geology.
The Devonian was a period so far back in time you can forget humans. Oh, it was way back
before the dinosaurs and even the animals that evolved into dinosaurs. During the Devonian,
around 400 million years ago, there were no land animals at all. And that wasn't the only
thing that was different about the Devonian period. The geography of the continents was
unrecognisable. Europe was in the tropics. It moves because the pieces of the Earth's
crust are in constant motion, floating on the Earth's upper mantle. Plates of basalt
which make up the ocean submerge under thicker plates made of granite, which are the continents.
As they do so, they melt, creating chains of volcanoes.
But when pieces of continent collide, they can't submerge. Instead, they crumple into
huge mountain ranges and eventually fuse together. For billions of years, these pieces of crust
have been splitting apart, drifting around and colliding.
By the beginning of the Devonian, two of these plates, Eurasia and North America, had crashed
together. As they pushed against each other, they threw up the Caledonian mountains and
forged Scotland. Further south, in the Cheviot Hills, the grinding
of the crustal plates caused enormous friction. Rocks at the base of the crust melted and
pushed their way through fissures to the surface. There they exploded in a cauldron
of ash, gas and molten lava. And this is the result. A thick layer of volcanic
material, heaped onto the barren Earth. Look at it closely and you can see it's a
mixture of ash, rock fragments and other volcanic debris. Sandwiched between layers of lava,
geologists estimate this volcanic material was once two kilometres thick. Towering volcanic
peaks dominated the landscape. So 400 million years ago, this was an enormous
mountain range. But wind, rain, sun and ice have worn the mountains down and as we travel
north-east, the peaks get smaller and lower. Their last gasp is an outlying lump called
Flodden Hill. It's covered in woodland today, but in 1513
this was an exposed volcanic outcrop and when King James saw it, he immediately realised
its potential. The steep scarps facing south would be like a fortress against the advancing
English army. He dug gun emplacements into the side of the hill and waited.
This outcrop on the side of Flodden Hill shows exactly what it's made of. A lava called
andesite, which flowed out of a volcano and then solidified into this solid mass.
But the sheer size of this volcanic outlier proved to be a little too impregnable. The
Earl of Surrey quite sensibly decided he didn't want to attack it.
So he came up with a risky plan. Surrey would lead his army right around Flodden Hill and
face the Scots from the other side. Out of sight he embarked on a two-day forced march.
His exhausted and bedraggled army finally reached its objective at about four o'clock
in the afternoon of the 9th of September. The vanguard of Surrey's army broke cover
here about a mile and a half north of Flodden Hill. James now realised that the English
army was behind him. His supply lines from Scotland had been cut and his line of retreat
blocked. He had no choice but to come down from his natural fortress. He moved his army
to the piece of high ground opposite called Branxton Hill. But what neither he nor Surrey
understood was that each was occupying a completely different type of slope. While the Scots were
still on the andesite, the volcanic rock, the English had set up on a piece of limestone
called cement stone, and that was to make all the difference.
To understand where these cement stone rocks came from, we need to fast forward 50 million
years from when those volcanoes were exploding. The earth looks very different. We're in the
Carboniferous, the next geological period after the Devonian, and a lot has changed.
After the volcanic eruptions stopped, the Cheviot Mountains began to erode. Then at
the beginning of the Carboniferous, sea levels rose, cutting them off. Being on the edge
of this mountain range, Flodden Hill would have been right on the coastline, the tropical
waters lapping up against it. It would have looked something like this. Not exactly how
we think of Northumberland. Tons of sediment were deposited at the bottom of these shallow
seas. Silt and sand washed out from rivers. The crushed shells of tiny marine animals
mixed with mud. The detritus piled up over millions of years. When the sea finally retreated
at the end of the Carboniferous, it left a thick layer of this material behind, collectively
known as the cement stone group. This is an outcrop not far from the battlefield.
You can see that the cement stone has hardened into this concrete-like rock, but it's weathered
into a very permeable material. The water drains away very freely.
In contrast to the impermeable andesite, rainwater drains easily from the cement stone group.
It gushes through cracks in the limestone. It filters into and between the layers of
sandstone. So these were the bedrocks on which our two
armies now squared up. The English troops exhausted after a long forced march. The Scottish
soldiers were rested and eager, and had a commanding position on the volcanic slopes
of Branxton Hill. They also had the unbeatable weapon of the
age, the Swiss pike. The pike was 15, 16 feet long. And you can
imagine, a bit like a porcupine, lots of them together made a formidable weapon. The medieval
version of the tank, with a front of 100 of these pikes moving forward at a steady pace,
they were absolutely unstoppable and devastating. After an artillery exchange, the battle opened
on the left flank, with formations of Scottish pikemen advancing across flat ground to the
west of Branxton Hill, towards Sir Edmund Howard and his 4,000 English foot soldiers.
The English were armed with the much smaller bill, a double-bladed weapon with a hook.
But the landscape easily favoured the pike. In this open country, the Scots charged into
the English lines and scattered them. If this success could be repeated with the other two
pike battalions, the Scots would easily have carried the day. But on the rest of the battlefield,
the geology was different. James IV didn't know it, but the volcanic
andesite under his feet was going to be a problem. And it was compounded by another
geological event he was equally, blissfully unaware of.
To understand it, we have to fast forward through the Carboniferous, through the age
of the dinosaurs, through the Tertiary period, almost right up to the present day in geological
terms. Through all this, the continent of Europe was pushed northwards by crustal plate
movement. Britain left the tropics and migrated to its current position. Now, in its colder,
more northerly latitude, it was hit head on by the Ice Age.
15,000 years ago, all this was buried under an ice sheet one mile thick. That's just
recently in geological terms, which means that the ice has left its mark.
If you've got an eye for these things, the hills and valleys here are full of glacial
clues and features. A huge ice sheet crept down from Scotland, hit the cheviate hills
and deflected to the east. The moving ice carried particles of eroded material in the
form of sand and gravel and churned up the underlying rock into a fine clay. As the Ice
Age ended, it melted, depositing this material on the landscape. And though neither side
could see it, the ice had left its fatal mark on the battlefield. Each slope had been coated
with a different glacial material. So the English began to draw up their formations
on the well-drained cement stone. The Scots marched towards them, on top of the impermeable
volcanic andesite. The retreating glaciers had gifted the English well-drained deposits
of sand and gravel. For the Scots, it had dumped a mucky, thick coating of clay called
till. On 9 September 1513, it began to rain. This had little effect on the English, who
stood firm on the cement stone, which carried the water away. But here on the Scottish side,
the volcanic bedrock trapped water in the coating of glacial clay. While the battalions
of pikes had done well on the left flank, here in the muddy slopes of the centre and
the right, the Scots began to slip and stumble. Slowly they began to break formation.
By the time they reached the bottom of the slope, their lines were already faltering.
And now they met the next obstacle, and this is where a mountain building event in Europe,
millions of years ago, was to seal their fate.
Throughout the Devonian and Carboniferous periods, a series of collisions between crustal
plates was throwing up mountain chains all over Europe. Called the Hercinian orogeny,
it formed the Ardennes in Belgium and the Massif Central in France. It was an event
that took place over hundreds of millions of years, and even today geologists are still
trying to make sense of it. But one thing they do know is that this upheaval caused
rocks in outlying areas to crack.
The cracks, called faults, run for several miles, and half a dozen can be found in the
Cheviot Hills. Each fault was heralded by an earthquake.
And this is Flodden Fault, running right through the middle of the battlefield. It separated
the Scots from the English. A series of earthquakes thrust up these andesites and pushed them
hard up against the cement stone. And it was this fault line that was to seal the fate
of the Scottish battalions.
This big fault system, which juxtaposes the younger cement stones of the Carboniferous
against the Devonian volcanics, that has moved the rocks on either side into that position,
such that subsequently, when they've weathered and eroded, you've now got this great topographic
difference.
The topographic difference washed tonnes of eroded material into the newly created gash
in the earth, forming a deep, boggy sump. The charge of the Scottish pike formations,
already disrupted by the wet clay till and the badly drained andesite slope, hit the
sticky bog of the fault line and began to break apart.
The pikes? Unstoppable. Formidable. Whilst they're in motion.
Unfortunately for the Scots, on the steeper part of Brankson Hill, suddenly the front
ranks were knee deep in mud, which slowed them down. The ranks behind piled on top of
them, complete confusion, and as they were no longer moving, they were suddenly a target.
Then the English bills had a go.
It has a point for stabbing and jabbing, it has, this one has another point for hacking
into armour, into a helmet, and it also has this deadly hook for grabbing the back of
the knee, or eye-wateringly, up and under.
It also has this axe-type blade here. This is a fearsome weapon.
From what had seemed almost certain victory, the Scots were now, incredibly, facing likely
defeat. Their only hope was a battalion of Highlanders held in reserve on the right flank.
But a Highland charge was stopped in its tracks by a breakaway detachment of English archers.
The Highlanders, thinking they'd been outflanked by a much larger contingent of Surrey's army,
broke off their charge and fled.
James was now desperately fighting on foot, alongside his men, their ranks broken, their
weapons useless, and surrounded on all sides. An arrow was shot through his mouth, and then
an unearned English soldier sliced his throat with a bill. James died along with his son,
eight earls and thirteen barons. The cream of Scottish nobility, a generation of leaders,
was wiped out.
Every year on the anniversary of the battle, a commemoration takes place at the Flodden
Monument overlooking the battle site. This is very much a Scottish affair. While in England
the Battle of Flodden is largely forgotten, for the Scots it's a significant and wrenching
piece of history. What could have been a golden age of Scottish Renaissance ended abruptly
and catastrophically.
Before the Battle of Flodden, Scotland was a very prosperous nation. James IV founded
universities, he looked after his people, and he was the most popular king Scotland
ever had, and then it all finished here. Within a hundred years, Scotland was united
with England, the crowns were united.
Battles are rarely decided by one factor alone. If James had been less impetuous, if the Highlanders
had charged earlier, the Scots might have carried the day. But the early Scottish success
on the left flank showed that what ultimately defeated them were geological events they
never even knew had happened.
The events three or four hundred million years ago have dictated the nature of the lithology,
the rocks beneath our feet at that particular point. And also not just the depositional
and environmental effects of that time, but the subsequent earth movements.
Geology sleeps underground. It only gets our attention when new disasters hit the headlines,
earthquakes, landslides, tsunami. But events that occurred far back in time are just disasters
lying in wait. A volcanic eruption that no one saw, an earthquake no one felt, an ice
sheet that came and went while our ancestors were still migrating out of Africa. All these
events have been waiting for their date with history.
