Typically you quarantine the sick. When someone has measles you quarantine them.
We've never seen where we quarantine the healthy.
Actually we have. The word quarantine itself comes from the practice of locking down healthy people for 40 days.
Quarantena, in old Italian, when ships arrived in Venice from areas of plague.
In the 17th century the villagers of Iam in England, most of them healthy,
locked themselves down when a few of their number caught bubonic plague.
If you don't recognise this guy, he's Dan Erickson, one of two doctors who held a press conference back in April.
They work for Accelerated Urgent Care in Bakersfield, California.
They specialise in common ailments like these.
And the reason for the press conference was to voice concern that their business was suffering because of Covid-19 restrictions.
This has caused some severe disruption for Accelerated as we have people coming in seven in the morning till midnight
or reporting to the health department or calling patients back and at the same time our volumes have dropped significantly.
Now I'm not unsympathetic to opinions that lockdowns may be doing more harm than good.
After all these doctors, like so many people running a business, have seen a sharp decline in income because of lockdowns.
They also have an adverse effect on mental health.
They increase domestic violence, economic hardship, infringe on civil liberty, raise unemployment and lower GDP.
So I don't mind listening to arguments for and against.
But I do mind when people try to support their case by misrepresenting scientific facts and figures and presenting bogus information.
And that's what's happening here.
They claimed that lockdown isn't necessary because they calculated, wrongly as it turns out,
that the infection fatality rate of Covid-19 is only 0.03%, a third that of flu.
That claim, of course, went viral.
So let's go through their calculation and just buzz in when you spot the mistake.
So if we look at California, these numbers are from yesterday.
We have 33,865 Covid cases out of a total of 280,900 total tested.
That's 12% of Californians were positive for Covid.
Good use of the buzzer.
And you're right.
It's not 12% of Californians who were Covid positive.
It's 12% of the people who got tested.
And they obviously aren't representative of the population as a whole.
Because before mass testing came in, people got tested because they had symptoms or were exposed to the virus
or thought they might have been exposed to the virus.
So there's going to be a much higher percentage of positive cases among those tested during the early weeks of the pandemic
compared to the general population.
It's like doing a survey of a waiting room at a Texas hospital
and then discovering that a third of the people waiting are critically ill.
You can't scale that up and assume that therefore a third of Texans must be critically ill.
So the more you test, the more positives you get.
But that's a classic case of mixing up measurements.
You get more positive cases but the percentage of positive cases
which is what the doctors are measuring for their calculation
doesn't go up, it goes down.
Even if the doctors don't understand the difference between a number and a percentage
which I find hard to believe
all they have to do is look at the data they claim to be using.
As testing expanded to the California population as a whole
shown by the light brown bars on this graph
the number of positive cases went up, shown by the darker brown at the bottom.
But the percentage of positive cases went down
shown by the blue line with the percentage scale on the right hand side.
A month after the doctors held their press conference
far more people were being tested
and of course the positivity rate was down from 12% to around 4.5%.
The doctors' analysis was so bad and so amateurish
that the American College of Emergency Physicians
and the American Academy of Emergency Medicine
took the extraordinary step of issuing a joint statement disowning it.
They called the doctors' claims reckless and untested musings.
I got interested in this topic when someone posted this on the forum
and it seems to be a view that's widely shared.
Listening to the science didn't work out so well
seven months later and a global recession
even Fauci now says on a recent 60 Minutes
he would not shut down the economy when faced with a similar virus.
Actually that's not what Fauci said
but I'm more interested in the idea that listening to the science isn't a good idea.
Because science can't tell you whether lockdowns are the right policy
that's a personal opinion and ultimately a political decision.
All it can tell you is what the epidemiological effects of a lockdown will be
the reproduction rate of the virus, the number of infections
and roughly how many people would die over what period of time.
That's why listening to the science always works out well
because it ensures that when a government weighs the pros and cons of lockdown
it does so on the basis of facts and figures
rather than ideological dogma, blind guesses and wishful thinking.
So what do real scientific studies say about lockdowns?
Lockdown has become a catch-all word to describe
restricted movements, limits on social gatherings
and the closure of certain businesses.
Sometimes the rules are tightened, sometimes they're relaxed
depending on whether the number of cases is rising or falling.
Scientific studies refer to these as restrictions or non-pharmaceutical interventions.
What about Sweden?
Sweden, Sweden, Sweden, Sweden.
Hold on, I'm going to look at Sweden in a minute.
A lot of posters on my channel suggested I take a look at the claims of Ivor Cummins
an Irish biochemical engineer who runs a YouTube channel.
Unlike the Bakersfield doctors, he actually cites scientific studies
which is commendable.
We now have many, many publications, including Lancet
that show clearly, based on the data, that lockdown
barely or does not affect deaths per million outcomes.
Well here's the first one on the list and the one Cummins highlights.
It wasn't published in The Lancet, which is one of the world's top two medical journals
it was published in eClinical Medicine
a separate open access journal owned by The Lancet.
Nevertheless, it concluded that lockdowns don't affect mortality rates
which is supportive of Cummins' claims.
But here's the problem.
When I look for other studies in Lancet-owned journals
and in The Lancet itself
they all reach the opposite conclusion.
They all concluded that lockdowns reduced rates of infection.
Some showed that the stricter lockdown measures were
the more effective they were
and they showed that when the strictest lockdown measures were lifted
infection rates began to rise again.
Picking one study from The Lancet group that supports your case
and ignoring all the others that don't
is called cherry picking
and it's a familiar tactic on social media.
So then I moved on to the second paper on Cummins' list
which was published by a very reputable journal, Science.
It's a shame that Cummins doesn't show the paper
and give a proper citation or link
so that people can read it for themselves.
I could only find the study by doing a search of Google Scholar
using the part of the title that Cummins showed.
It's a paper by Denning et al.
But when I clicked on the link
it turns out that the title of the paper has changed.
According to Cummins, the paper claimed
lockdown had only a minor effect.
In fact, their study
which looked at lockdowns in Germany
found a clear reduction of the spreading rate
related to each governmental intervention.
And it concluded
results suggest that the full extent of government interventions
was necessary to stop exponential growth.
Then I checked the third citation in the list
which turns out to be ambiguous.
There's no such thing as the Koch Institute.
There's the Robert Koch Institute in Germany
a respected government medical agency
that advises on responses to the pandemic.
And there's the Charles Koch Institute
in the United States
an American lobby group that gives frequent opinions
and conclusions on the pandemic
from a political perspective.
If Cummins is citing
the political lobby group
Charles Koch, then its opinions
about the reproduction rate
are irrelevant because it isn't a scientific body.
If Cummins is citing
the scientific institute
the Robert Koch Institute
it's stated very clearly that lockdowns are effective.
In this bulletin
the RKI says
Oh, sorry.
Isolation measures
of confirmed cases and the quarantining
of contact persons lead not only
to a reduction in the number of secondary cases
but also to a shortening of
the generation time.
The RKI even did a review of studies
that looked at the effect of restrictions
and interventions.
It listed the conclusions of each one.
The vast majority
found that restrictions slowed the
reproduction rate of the virus
and reduced the number of cases
or both.
If you want to check them for yourselves
the review is linked in the video description.
Based on this thorough review
of the scientific literature
the RKI doesn't conclude
that lockdowns are ineffective
it says the complete opposite.
In our analysis we find
a strong dose response effect
of restrictions on gatherings
the requirement to wear masks
and the closings of workplaces and schools
and both of the COVID-19 pandemic.
I'm not going to go through the list
and track down every blog article
and study.
That's something Cummins should have done
before he posted it.
But at number 17 I did spot one that I'd already read
in the British Medical Journal
so I knew that Cummins had misrepresented
that one too.
It's not a scientific study
it's a non peer reviewed news article
looking at why Belarus had so few deaths
due to COVID-19.
The likely explanations
the article reports are a high
proportion of hospital beds per thousand
population, 40 times
that of the UK, and a
structural bias towards dealing with
pandemics and mass testing
and very few care homes
and the relative isolation
of the country that means borders
could be easily closed and
travellers monitored.
And finally because Belarus is a dictatorship
where the figures may have been
fudged anyway, some experts
fear that many coronavirus
related deaths are registered
as cases of pneumonia.
Most importantly even if it
had been a scientific study
the article made no conclusion about
the effectiveness of lockdown
and nothing in the article that suggests
lockdowns are ineffective.
So just like numbers two and three
what on earth is it doing on
Cummins' list?
He needs to check all these supposed sources
read them properly, make sure
they're peer reviewed scientific studies and
not newspaper stories or political
blogs, pick out the ones that really
do show that lockdowns are ineffective
and then repost an accurate
list.
If you don't cherry pick and misread
what real scientific studies
show is that lockdowns are effective.
It doesn't mean they're a good
idea, it just means that
they are effective in reducing the spread
of an infectious disease.
That's been known since 14th century
Venice and it's pretty obvious
why. So all other things
being equal the strictest lockdown
measures, which most countries
do when the R8 gets dangerously high
ought to result in a reduction of
Covid-19 cases after
about 10 to 14 days.
And that's exactly what we see.
What about Sweden? Sweden. Sweden.
Sweden. Sweden. Alright, so what
about Sweden? Sweden never
locked down, never mandated masks
never closed their borders,
never closed their under-16 schools,
never closed the restaurants
and bars and did everything they could
to avoid trampling on human rights.
Sweden took an approach based
on science. Well, Tony Heller
did get one thing right. Sweden
took an approach based on science,
just like most countries with a couple
of obvious exceptions.
Swedish epidemiologists know as well
as American or British epidemiologists
that eliminating mass gatherings
and restricting movement
slow the spread of the virus,
including the architect of the Swedish
model Anders Tegnell.
He says people who claim Sweden
didn't have restrictions are
wrong. You're saying
that the strategy here, apart from the face mask
is pretty much the same as everywhere else, is that?
To a great extent, yes.
I mean, we also slow down many
things.
The
domestic air flights
in Sweden were slowed down to
basically nothing. There was no domestic
flights in Sweden anymore.
This was due to people stopped travelling, not because
we made it mandatory for the flights to stop.
Trains were also cut down
quite a lot, so
the society really slowed down
quite a lot also in Sweden.
I think much more than many people in other countries
understand. The reason Tegnell
thought a voluntary system would work
is that Sweden has a number of advantages
over countries outside
of Scandinavia.
For one thing, it has a modern universal
healthcare system that the authorities
calculated had enough ICU
beds to cope with a high number
of COVID cases and treat
them effectively. Secondly,
most Swedes live alone,
and the country isn't a major tourist destination
or a travel crossroads,
so it would be less vulnerable to a rapid
spread of the virus.
Sweden isn't a particularly religious
country, so you don't see many
mass gatherings in churches or mosques.
And most importantly,
imposing rules is probably not
even necessary. After all,
this is the nation that gave us ABBA
and Volvo's. Swedes don't
go around raping and pillaging anymore.
They're a pretty sensible, responsible
people who for the most part follow
government advice.
Isn't that a little racist?
If I like their race,
how can that be racist?
So the authorities opted for guidelines
like these rather than legally
enforced rules. Refrain
from unnecessary journeys,
avoid public transport, don't go
to meetings and concerts, and so on.
Life looks pretty good in Sweden.
Things are open, their schools
are open, their universities are
open. People in Sweden are
going about their lives normally.
Well, not really. A photograph doesn't
tell the whole story.
Sweden may have a more relaxed approach
than countries like Britain and France,
but life in Sweden over the last 11
months has been anything but normal.
As well as the voluntary
guidelines, there are also restrictions
mandated by law.
Crowd sizes at public events
were limited to 50 people,
and as the virus got worse, that number
was reduced to just eight.
Restaurants and bars can only serve
customers who are seated.
Visits to nursing homes are restricted.
There are travel restrictions from other
countries. Twice, schools have
switched to remote learning, and
that's in addition to all the voluntary
guidelines I just showed you regarding
gatherings, social distancing, and
staying home.
A survey by Sweden's Civil Contingencies
Agency suggests that
87% of the population
are continuing to follow social distancing
recommendations, and domestic
airlines are grounded.
And according to Anders Tenjel,
Swedes have only around 30%
of the social interactions that
they did prior to the pandemic.
Sweden travelled a lot less than they
usually do. They actually decreased their
travel more than the travel was
decreased in our Scandinavian
neighbours.
If you ask Swedes,
80-90% of them say that
their lives have been very much affected
by the Covid-19. So
I think you make a mistake if
you think that the Swedish lockdown was
less in place
and was less effective than in many
places just because it was a voluntary
lockdown. So admire the Swedish
model by all means, but let's
not pretend that life in Sweden has
gone on as normal. This is
all far from normal.
Sweden has reached herd immunity
even as the United States
panics. But Sweden is nowhere
near reaching herd immunity.
That's the problem with believing tabloid
newspapers like the Daily Mail
instead of listening to epidemiologists
and checking the figures.
Back in May, Professor Bjorn
Olsson said herd immunity in
Sweden is a long way off
if we ever reach it. And in August
he co-authored a study showing
rates of infection way below the
60-70% needed
for herd immunity.
As did a study commissioned by the
Swedish Public Health Agency in May
and a third study in December.
And even the man
every proponent of the Swedish model
likes to quote, Anders Tegnell,
said as late as November
that the issue of herd immunity is
difficult and there are no signs
of immunity in the population that
are slowing down the infection.
In this graph you can see the difference
between what's going on in Sweden
with Dr Anders Tegnell
versus the US with Dr Fauci.
But of course the United States
is doing even worse than Sweden.
Anders Tegnell was put in charge
of Sweden's pandemic policy
while Anthony Fauci had no
executive power at all.
He could only advise a president
who routinely ignored his advice.
So while Sweden had a national
plan led by an epidemiologist
the United States had none
led by a politician.
And there are other differences.
Sweden had a universal healthcare
system which could cope with a
pandemic and where everyone could get
treated free of charge.
Whether you think that's a good thing or a bad thing
it's something the United States
doesn't have.
And unlike Sweden where few people go to church
millions of Americans continued
to pack places of worship.
And Swedes are pretty healthy.
Compare the level of diabetes
in Sweden with that of the
United States.
This is the level of obesity in Sweden
compared to the USA.
And while most domestic
flights in Sweden were grounded
in the United States they continued
flying. And most Swedes
followed government guidelines and restrictions.
In the United States these
varied from state to state and
were often ignored even by the
leader of the country. And even
by politicians urging others to follow
the guidelines.
So why would anyone be surprised that the
American death toll was higher?
To see how Sweden's been doing
it's no good comparing it to countries with
completely different population densities
different obesity levels
different healthcare systems and different
cultures. You need to compare it with
countries where all those things are similar.
And that's not hard.
Sweden's neighbours have very
similar profiles in all those respects.
The only significant differences
were mandatory lockdowns
versus voluntary lockdown
and policies on mask wearing, test
and trace.
The result? At the time of writing
Sweden has a mortality rate
in other words the number of deaths per million people
four times that of Denmark
eight times that of Finland
and ten times that of Norway.
And now even mainstream
media outlets like Newsweek
are acknowledging the fact that they succeeded.
Well that may be Newsweek's
opinion, but opinion is not
fact. If the United States
had the same mortality rate as Sweden
then instead of having 260,000
deaths at the time of writing
it would have had 210,000
deaths.
People can have their own opinions about whether
that's a success, but they aren't
entitled to change the facts to
fit that opinion.
So what's my opinion?
Well of course the whole point of this channel is not
to tell you what I think, but to
fact check the claims of those who do
give you their opinion and to present
facts so you can form your own opinion.
You just can't
borrow someone else's opinion off the shelf
or beat the drum for a team.
You have to answer questions
that are rather difficult to answer.
For example, apart from the
fatalities caused by COVID-19
how do we assess the downside
of millions of people who didn't die
but continue to feel the effects?
I also wanted to mention that 96%
of people in California who get COVID
recover with almost no significant
sequelae, or no significant
continuing medical
problems. But where does that
figure come from? That's the
trouble with doing science by press conference.
There's a tendency to dream up
some figures on the back of an envelope
and throw others out with a confident
knowledge they can't be checked.
Ericsson is saying that only
about 4% of people suffer
long-term effects from COVID-19.
It's impossible to say if Ericsson
got that figure from a reliable source
or made a mistake, or found
it in a blog, or simply made it
up. All I can do is
cite proper studies and real figures
which do have sources you can
check. For example, a British
study found that 10% of people
experience prolonged illness after
COVID-19. A paper
in the Journal of the American Medical Association
found that 71% of
COVID cases in Italy had
symptoms during infection,
and of those, 32%
still had one or two symptoms two months
later, and 44%
had a worse quality of life.
Another US study found that
only 35% of people
didn't return to their previous level of
health two to three weeks after
a positive test.
It's known as long-COVID,
the long-term health problems brought on
by COVID-19.
Symptoms range from fatigue and joint
pain to chest pain and
diarrhoea, and more seriously heart
problems and breathing difficulties.
I sympathise with people like
the Bakersfield doctors whose businesses
are suffering, but giving misinformation
like that isn't helping.
If we, as Tony Abbott
suggested, let nature run its course
and take no action to curb the virus,
would these doctors be back in business
or would patients be even
less likely to visit their hospital?
Would it make businesses
like cafes, bars and movie theatres
more popular, or would
people be worried about an uncontrolled
pandemic and stay away?
In other words, would keeping
everything open and letting
the pandemic run its course
result in better economic conditions
or worse?
And what about the people who work in these places
and interact with a heavily infected
public? Is it fair
to ask them to risk their lives,
and if they refuse, would it be fair
to sack them? And if people
were free to contract COVID, which
is surely their right, is
that fair on people they might
infect, or on hospital staff who
would then have to risk their lives treating
these people? And how do
we factor in the cost of lockdown
in terms of mental health,
educational setback, how do you
assess that level of pain felt by
millions of people under lockdown
and then compare it to, say, the
pain of losing a loved one or
the suffering caused by long COVID?
I know that borrowing
an opinion off the shelf is very
simple, quick and easy, and
thinking about questions like these,
weighing them in the balance and checking
all the facts and figures is
much harder work.
But if you're going to voice an opinion and
hold that opinion very firmly,
then I hope you have weighed each of these
questions carefully and are very
sure of your answers.
Thank you.
