The way the workweek works is the worst.
Waking up on Monday, you've got five days in a row of work or school.
It's too much for
But by Wednesday, withered is your soul
with two more days, nay, three more days until the weekend.
But alas, the weekend is also broken.
Two is the wrong number of days off
because the first day off is just a collapse from the overly long workweek
and the second day off is tainted by the looming Monday.
The traditional weekend is, at best, 50% efficient.
It takes three days off just to feel like two days off
and two days off feels like one day off.
But here is where it gets interesting
because one day off isn't none day off.
A day off never goes unappreciated.
Which brings me to a new schedule for new living.
Weekend Wednesday.
Take the last three workdays, slide them over one slot
and bring the spare weekend day forward to Wednesday.
Now, when you wake up on Monday, there's only two days to go until Weekend Wednesday.
Then just three more days till Sunday.
I've been working on this schedule and boy, do I love it.
Here are the advantages.
Productivity goes down without breaks.
That's true on the scale of a day to the scale of a year or a life
and it's certainly true on the scale of a week.
Well-timed breaks equals a more effective you.
A two-day push followed by a break
then a three-day push and rest feels amazing on both cycles.
The days off are more relaxing and the days on more concentrated.
If you're self-employed with control over your schedule
or a student able to pick classes to keep days clear
I strongly suggest you give it a try.
And if you're an employer your employee is enthusiastically sharing this video with
it's worth considering if everyone is on board.
Now, of course, Weekend Wednesday won't work for the whole world and that's fine.
Better even, because that creates an off-cycle advantage for those of us who are on it.
Having a free day when everyone else is working
makes so many things easier and faster and crowdless.
As for the Saturday, you now have time to wrap up the work week
without interruptions from the rest of the world
leaving Sunday as a true day of rest.
So that's the glory of Weekend Wednesday.
More frequent days off that feel 100%,
more concentrated and shorter work sprints with a bonus off-cycle advantage.
If those sound intriguing, why not give it a try
and see if Weekend Wednesday works for you.
