In the middle of Wiltshire lies a ring of large standing stones, each weighing around 25 tons.
It is believed the monument was assembled between 4,000 or 5,000 years ago.
Archaeological evidence suggests it may have been a burial site or perhaps a place of healing where the injured were taken.
Some also theorize it may have had a religious or astronomical importance.
We call this place Stonehenge.
We also call it a monument, but we don't even know if its creators would think such a thing.
The culture that produced it left no written records, and even how it was built is still up for debate.
In 1136, in his book, The History of the Kings of Britain,
Geoffrey of Monmouth, an early British historiographer, claimed the wizard Merlin built Stonehenge.
Here's an illustration from the mid-14th century based on that theory.
For roughly 500 years, building something like Stonehenge seemed so difficult
that it was commonly accepted that a wizard did it.
Apparently, he did it with his bare hands, too.
Thanks, Geoffrey!
It's a mysterious place because it provides us with questions and no real answers.
What was the intent of its creators? What did they think of it, and what became of them?
What would a Britain built by these people look like?
The so-called monument points away to a version of the world that never came to be.
Instead, it's one of the sole creations of a culture whose ideas and intent have simply vanished.
Will we ever really know who built Stonehenge, or what it was for?
Probably not.
And besides, it's just a bunch of rocks.
Anyway, today we're going to talk about Dragonslayer.
You play as a police mouse, who has to take back stolen goods from a gang of cats
by bouncing around in a weird void with random objects in it.
You can't really tell those pinky-purply things are cats,
and also, one would question the ability of a police captain who sent a mouse with no backup
to confiscate stolen goods from an army of cats,
but, you know, it's a pretty simple game.
It's a game where you have to play as a mouse, and it's a game where you have to play as a cat.
...police captain who sent a mouse with no backup to confiscate stolen goods from an army of cats,
but it's fine enough.
On June 14th, Mario Brothers hit arcades.
This was the first appearance of Mario's brother, Luigi.
Oh boy, I'm so happy to meet Mario, but with different colors.
Together, up to two players can jump around in a hellish void
knocking pixelated facsimiles of turtles around.
I mean, both of these games are fun to play,
but visually speaking, they're pretty poor appropriations of the thing the player's told they're doing.
I'm telling you all this so you can maybe imagine the impact when,
on June 19th that year,
just five days after Mario Brothers told you this mass of colors was a man called Luigi,
this happened.
["Dragon's Lair"]
["Dragon's Lair." You control the actions of a daring adventurer
finding his way through the castle of a dark wizard."
Hey, look! It's an actual person
who is trying to not die in an actual dungeon-looking place,
and look how much animation there is!
Look at the actual capital-A animation!
And if we look closely enough, we can even, maybe, see a game in here somewhere.
The mechanics of the game are very simplistic.
You watch the pretty impressively animated character make his way through a room,
and then press one of four directions or the attack button
when it's appropriate to do one of those things,
and if you do the wrong thing, you lose a life and get to watch a death animation.
And to store all the data for those animations,
the arcade game used a revolutionary content distribution system for the time
called a Laserdisc.
Ow!
Laserdiscs had been in use since the late 70s,
but the idea of using one of these as a way of storing more picture and sound information
than a normal arcade game could use hadn't been implemented in many games at this point.
This game was designed by Don Bluth, former Disney animator,
and Rick Dyer—forget about this guy, you'll never hear from him again,
let's just talk about Don Bluth some more—
he'd just made The Secret of NIMH, one of the best-looking animated films ever,
and was about to go on to make Rock-a-Doodle,
Thumbelina,
A Troll in Central Park,
The Pebble and the Penguin,
Titan A.E.,
and also some good films.
I never saw any of the good ones growing up, um, so...
Bluth and his small team used their animation chops
to create an actually nice-looking game with dynamism and charm.
The game looked amazing, and everyone knew it.
Even though it was more expensive to play than other games,
they had huge lines at arcades,
and the machine sold amazingly,
with arcade producers partially thanking it
for getting them through a financially difficult time in history.
And I do mean difficult.
Outside of arcades, what would later be called
the Great Video Game Crash of 1983 was happening.
The revenues of home game sales dropped almost 97%,
but Dragon's Lair and its appealing gimmick
had somewhat insulated arcades from these troubles.
This article from 1984 says LaserDisc Games
may be the wave of the future,
and drums up hype for Bluth's next game,
Space Ace.
♪♪
Space Ace was similarly great-looking,
though it was effectively the same game as its predecessor,
only with a different theme and new animations.
It's just as fun to watch,
but by the time of its release later in 1984, however,
that wasn't really enough.
The lack of gameplay in these games
had come back to haunt them in the market.
There wasn't much replay value.
Once you knew how to beat it, that was it.
This put an upper ceiling on how much a person
could go back and enjoy something,
when other games had many levels and increasing difficulty.
Players had grown tired of the style,
and arcade owners went into buying expensive game units
with temperamental discs inside them
that players could memorize and never play again.
What they want is variety.
We constantly get tired of one type of food
or one type of movie or one type of game,
and so as you progress, you want to go on to a new thing.
LaserDisc Games had proven to be more
the splash of the future than the wave,
and the tide had gone out.
I think I might have gone a little bit overboard
with the water metaphors.
So what if you wanted more of this type of game
or wanted to see what directions the genre explored
as time went on?
There've been a couple of revivals over the years,
like Braindead 13, which is probably straight up
the best example of this weird subgenre
of playable animation,
and there's also more weird cash-ins
from the original boom to go back and find,
like, uh, Time Gal or Ninja Hayate
or Super Don Quixote
or...
E-Esch's...
Au-runmiller.
If your timing is off, poor Don will die a hideous death.
Or Cliffhanger, which was actually made out
of recut footage from Lupin III films,
including Castle of Cagliostro.
So we technically got an arcade game
featuring animation by Hayao Miyazaki.
That's kind of mind-blowing.
Jump!
Jump!
It was clearly rushed incredibly quickly
to make it to market, so the dub is so atrocious
that you can actually make out the original Japanese voices
from the films underneath.
Clarisse!
Dragon's Lair's namesake earned it a good deal
of notoriety and nostalgia,
even as its format and imitators failed.
The game had several sequels
and has been repackaged many times
onto almost every imaginable console.
There was an Indiegogo campaign to fund a piece
designed to help fund a Dragon's Lair movie.
In other words, to take even what game there was
out of their game.
There's also a couple of different ports
that are actually new games,
including a famously ridiculously difficult NES version
of which I've never even beaten the first screen.
There's a rubbish SNES version of Space Ace,
but neither actually captures the thing
that made these games cool and unique at the time,
so they wouldn't be all that interesting
even if they were fun.
So if you're interested in tracking this genre
of fully animated adventure game,
there isn't that much to track.
But what if I told you there was an even more true successor
to Dragon's Lair than the hasty sequels or the cash-ins?
What if I told you there was a secret,
forgotten third game in the saga
of Dragon's Lair and Space Ace?
Ooh, saga.
That makes it sound important.
But first, a question everyone seems to take for granted.
Who made Dragon's Lair?
♪♪
When people think of Dragon's Lair,
they think of Don Bluth.
It's easy to see why.
Let's look at one of the posters.
Magicon presents a Don Bluth Studios production.
Design and animation, Don Bluth.
Produced by Don Bluth.
Directed by Don Bluth.
Copyright, Don Bluth.
Posters don't have to be arranged this way.
This is a purposeful choice.
It creates the impression that, like a modern-day Merlin,
Don Bluth assembled Dragon's Lair with his own two hands.
Geoffrey of Monmouth never left us.
He just became a marketing consultant.
The creator is Don Bluth,
who once directed several Disney features
in the mid-1970s.
Last year, Bluth found his own audience
with his first animated feature,
The Secret of NIMH.
You see, people tend to remember history
in terms of winners.
Secret of NIMH had been wildly successful
the previous year.
Don Bluth was swiftly becoming a household name,
and his legend about leaving Disney
and piling everything he had into NIMH,
even mortgaging his house to complete it,
and making it all back and more,
was compelling.
History likes people who gamble and win,
and history tends to only remember
whose name was on the poster.
History has a knack of not remembering
the hundreds of talented people
who worked on Secret of NIMH,
or the other animators behind Dragon's Lair,
or the programmers who made the system work at all,
or the man who actually made the game.
["The Idea of Turning Cartoons into Video Games"]
["was developed at Rick Dyer Industries."
["We're in the entertainment business."
Remember Rick Dyer?
Despite the game actually being conceived
and programmed by RDI Video Systems
and RDI being short for Rick Dyer Industries,
history appears to have conspired
to make sure people forget Dyer
and that the game was his idea
and that he'd had this idea for a long time.
["It's the forerunner of Dragon's Lair.
["It was developed way back in 1979."
["This was Dyer's first computerized interactive game."
Dyer had spent his youth making fantasy games
using text and pictures drawn onto cash register paper
programmed to scroll to the right point as he made choices.
When attempts to sell a digitized game
along these lines failed,
he decided that more animation
would create a better connection with the viewer
and started work on Dragon's Lair.
Later, he hired John Bluth's studio
to do the animation itself.
But despite his success,
Dyer was aware of the flaws with Dragon's Lair and Space Ace.
Firstly, he'd wanted people to be able to play them at home,
but arcades had become a necessity
given the expense of the technology required to play them.
Secondly, they were short and had limited scope
in terms of story or genuine decision-making.
Dyer had gotten into making games as a kid
because he liked to make big adventures with grand stories.
He wasn't happy with Dragon's Lair or Space Ace.
He wanted to make something bigger.
["I think right now the arcade industry is playing catch-up to us.
I know what's coming after the introduction of our home system."
["What I'm going to do is to create a world that is so real
and that you will have a hard time telling what's real and what isn't."
In late 1984, Dyer's company began work
on what he hoped would blow the lid off
of home gaming again after its collapse.
He was about to inaugurate a company
that would be able to produce games
that would be able to be played at home.
However, the company didn't have the funds
to produce the games it was going to produce.
The Halcyon was an incredibly ambitious system.
The name—designed to deliberately invoke
the name of Hal 9000 from 2001 A Space Odyssey.
And no, that's not me being weird
and reading too much into it this time.
They really meant to invite that comparison.
["If you remember the movie 2001 A Space Odyssey,
there was a guy named Hal 9000,
and he was the one who came up with the name
of the game that was going to be released in 2001."
["If you remember the movie 2001 A Space Odyssey,
there was a computer in that movie called Hal."
Why you would make your console invoke the name
of an AI that goes mad and kills most of its crew,
I don't know.
I think you might have fallen asleep
halfway through the film.
For the time, it was ambitious,
the same way Dragon's Lair had been.
You could speak to Hal,
the name of the AI in the Halcyon,
and it could talk back to you and even remember your name.
["Good evening, Hal.
What do you want, Rick?"
What do you want, Rick?
It sounds so mad at him.
["Eight."
["That's my 847 spin."
["Disco."
["Maybe he's what a computer should have been,
all along, something that anybody can use
because anybody can talk."
Hang on.
Clearly, Rick Dyer's never been to Liverpool.
Ha-ha! Ha-ha!
Obviously, this is basic AI by modern standards,
but the idea of a home media device
you could talk to in 1984
before the 8-bit Nintendo Entertainment System
was even out in America or Europe
was kind of amazing.
["Visit worlds which were only dreams
before Halcyon,
like nothing you've experienced ever."
Here's Dyer demonstrating Hal
on a 1985 edition of the show Computer Chronicles.
["If I have your voice, friend,
please say your name."
["Stuart."
["Nice to see you again, Stuart Sheffy.
Can I call you Stuart?"
["Yes."
["Yes. Okay, Stuart."
And to launch with it, Dyer and his team
were working on a new game.
It was called Thayer's Quest.
["The game that comes with this is Thayer's Quest."
["This is a story about greed,
about unbridled ambition and powerlust
and the disaster resulting from those faults."
Thayer's Quest was gonna be more
than just a video file with button prompts.
Thayer's Quest was going to be an adventure.
["What we're creating is going to allow you
to be anything that you ever wanted to be
and experience it.
You're gonna be there.
You will live and die by your decisions."
A game where you choose where your character goes
on a journey across a world of five kingdoms
interacting with an all-new fantasy story.
["Unlike standard video games that demand quick reflexes,
the new project places a premium on thinking.
You talk to the computer, and it will talk back."
An adventure featuring animation
instead of just text or the day's primitive graphics,
utilizing Laserdisc technology once more,
but on a scale even more grand
than the game's spiritual predecessors
and doing it all in the player's own home.
["We're estimating that you'll be able to play the game
20 hours a week for six months
before you will have explored the entire world."
The price tag of this home Laserdisc player
slash games console slash talking AI computer?
$2,500.
That's nearly $6,000 in 2017 money,
which means that in the UK,
it would cost at least 400 pounds.
Laserdisc players were crazy expensive at the time,
but even that was pretty steep.
But hey, you could play an animated adventure quest
by talking to a computer.
["There has never been speech recognition
of the high caliber that this has."
Well, not really.
["Let's go to the forest clearing."
["One."
["What?"
["One."
["Speak consistently, Stuart."
["One."
["Sir?"
["Two."
["Two."
["Is that okay, I mean?"
You see, this was the 80s.
People had an idea of what the future was going to look like
without really knowing it or thinking about its practicalities.
The future is always different from how people of the present
think the future will be.
The Halcyon was ultimately a poor facsimile
of one man's best guess as to what the future would look like,
and it turned out not to be a very good guess.
Still, I really wanted to know what this device
was actually like to use and what Taya's quest played like,
so I decided to take a look on eBay and see if one popped up.
That was a year and a half ago.
So far, I've seen one go up
for $600 plus some hefty import fees.
Based on rumblings on other forums,
one tends to appear on eBay, perhaps even the same one,
every year or so.
While flyers advertising the Halcyon were circulated
and some stores even took pre-orders
and some salesmen were given copies
to demonstrate to potential customers,
it's actually up for debate
whether the Halcyon was ever officially released.
It's possible that this shot
contains every existing Halcyon.
As far as I can tell, no museums
have a Halcyon in their corridors,
except possibly the Video Game History Museum
in Frisco, Texas.
If I ever end up in Texas for some reason,
like, I don't know, my plane crashes,
I'll head there and see if they've got it.
So the Halcyon was a failure.
It didn't sell very well.
In fact, it arguably didn't sell very well
because it didn't sell very well.
In fact, it arguably didn't actually make it
to the stores in a way people could buy,
and the company went bankrupt pretty soon after,
but that's not the end of Teya's quest.
When the company started to go under,
they started selling conversion kits
for Dragon's Lair arcade cabinets.
It's hard to tell how well those sold either,
but Laserdiscs, marquees, instruction manuals,
and EEPROM chips from the game are floating around on eBay,
so there's probably at least a few.
I've heard tell of the arcade version
appearing at conventions and some other gaming events.
It's still pretty rare, though,
never mind if you'd be able to get together
the technology to actually play them.
Wait. What's this?
Teya's Quest? On...
CD-ROM?
From Canada?
For only 19.94 Canadian US dollars?
I mean...
I had to.
Didn't I? I had to.
I needed to know.
Ah, and here we are.
Is it in the shot?
Okay, great, yeah.
...on a disc
far smaller than it was ever designed for.
This disc was printed in 2005,
over 20 years
after it was originally made,
and that means it's another 12 years old
on top of that.
The latest system requirements
that it recommends what operating system you can use
is Windows XP.
God, do you remember those days when that was the fastest operating system?
This...
Just...
God, it even smells of Windows XP.
Like...
a very old, new car smell
and just the beginning of dust.
Ah, it's beautiful.
It's like a time capsule.
Thanks, Canada.
Hey, according to this Digital Leisure put this out,
you might remember them as the people
who did some PlayStation Home, like, casino games
that were pretty popular,
and then when PlayStation Home closed,
I think they're moving them to Steam.
And then before... Oh, wait!
They did the re-releases of, uh,
Dragon's Lair and the sequel to that
and, uh, Space Ace, didn't they?
So it makes sense that they would do this.
Did they also do Mad Dog McCree
and Space Pirates?
Space Pirates is, like,
a game only I seem to remember whenever I bring it up.
I hope I'm not imagining that game.
Anyway, let's close the loop on all this
and actually give this game a look, shall we?
♪♪
In a traditional fantasy land,
the bad wizard man thing,
Saucerball, has killed almost all
of the Elder Kings
and is going to take over the world.
The last in the Elder Kings line is the player character,
Téa Alkenred.
His wizard mentor, Droos,
wants him to gather the five artifacts
that form an amulet called the Hand
made by another wizard
named Kwoad in order to beat Saucerball.
Kwoad is gone,
but the one who will come remains.
I am ready.
But before Droos will send him on his quest,
he gives him a final test.
That rhymed. That was weird.
♪♪
Téa, choose an exit quickly
or fail this test of magic.
You have to choose the left door
or the right door.
You have failed, Téa.
You're dead. You're just dead.
Your mentor's test kills you immediately
if you choose the wrong door,
and he's supposed to be the good guy.
Anyway, if you get it right, he gives you a pouch
with your first three items, single-use spells,
which are the solution to three puzzles in the game,
and then you get to go out into the world.
I have tried 22 apprentices over the years,
and they have all died.
I bet right now Téa's thinking,
yeah, and how many of those did you kill
by sending to the ticking clock,
flying symbol, fantasy zone?
The game does diverge in gameplay
from its predecessors in a kind of significant way.
You actually choose places to go
and what items to use,
and take your time to make decisions.
You're no longer hitting buttons to not die
while traversing a linear path.
It's incredibly simplistic, though.
A lot of choices amount to picking one
and hoping it's not the one that kills you,
like with the two doors,
or perhaps, to be a bit more accurate,
a choose-your-own-adventure book,
like Warlock of Firetop Mountain
or Creature of Havoc
or the Goosebumps ones.
You choose where to go from a list
with a mouse in this version
instead of saying a number out loud, sadly,
and sometimes you use an item.
It's very trial and error.
For example, at this point,
a lady gives you this advice.
...which burns on the marshways
can destroy the landwares.
What's a landware?
How is this advice useful to a player?
It's a made-up word.
Then at one point later on,
these ghosts attack you, and then you get one chance
to use an item, and you die if it's the wrong item.
Well, guess what?
These are the landwares,
and you need to have gone to a place
that's covered in fire
and click on it
to then realize it's cold fire
so that you take some and then put it in your bag
first, and then you use it here
to kill the landwares and progress.
And yeah, the game lets you use the scrolls
in places where they don't solve the puzzle
they're made for, and they're just gone.
You can waste a scroll on the landwares
if you think that's what you're supposed to use,
and they even have it so they don't kill you
for trying, even though you can't progress
at this point because you can no longer
pick up this crystal without exploding
because you needed the scroll of release.
The art and animation isn't nearly as good
as in Dragon's Lair or Space Ace.
It looks okay, but it was quite clearly rushed.
The game keeps finding excuses
to not have to lip-sync anyone's mouths.
Are you the people of the dunes?
I mean no harm to you.
There are different voice lines for coming back
to some areas more than once, which means
the animation with no clear mouth movement can be easily
reused. I think this is why they did it,
but it just means the whole game looks
less good at the expense of being reusable.
What? You again?
What? You again?
Overall, it's a lot less dynamic
or fantastical than the other games,
but since it relies more on decision-making
than quick reflexes, I can understand the visual change.
Some of the deaths are still pretty funny.
This might just be
the only game in history
where you can be killed by wheat.
Also, the voice acting's pretty good, isn't it?
Apart from after you kill
the False King Torlok—remember that name,
by the way—one of his guards has this to say.
I'm sorry. I had no choice.
For ten years I've waited to see this.
Thank you, friend!
Nothing says welcome to a realm
of fantasy and adventure quite like
Kermit the Frog.
This version is basically just a bunch of video files
playing in a custom video player.
If you check the disc's files, even the inventory screens
are just .mpegs on a loop.
It's almost clever how they managed to get the old game
together on a new system, but it's also
a reminder that the game you're playing is literally
just a collection of interlocking menus,
like the weird bonus games they used to put on
early DVD releases of films.
Anyway, after a bit over 30 minutes of trial
and error—somewhat less than the
month's dire predicted—I had
three artifacts and reached the bridge to the fourth
kingdom, The Far Reaches.
Pass and be warned
that the southern barbarians roam
The Far Reaches.
It is a lawless kingdom now.
Wha—wait, what?
You have beaten Téa's Quest?
More challenges await you in Shadowin?
The sequel to Téa's—
what? The game ends with a trailer
for a game called Kingdom Shadowin.
Why does the main character look so different?
How is there a sequel to a
game no one played on a console
that no one bought? How did
playing this game only give me more questions?
Wh—what?
♪♪
Okay.
It turns out there's one more
twist in the tale of Téa's Quest.
There's also the twist that it's
pronounced Théa's Quest,
but it's too late to re-record
all the voiceover, so...
The game was either left unfinished or intended to be
the first part in a series released hastily
to try to recoup costs for it in the Halcyon,
with plans to make a sequel before the company
went bankrupt and the whole endeavor was scrapped.
While this 2005 CD
is a close to faithful version of the
original audio and video of the arcade version,
and also there's a DVD version released
at the same time just for DVD players
and there's some more behind-the-scenes footage on it,
a decade prior, in 1995,
ten years before this version
and ten years after the original release,
the game was ported to the 3DO,
the CDI, and DOS PCs
under the name Kingdom the Far
Reaches. The CDI and
3DO are basically considered critical and
commercial failures, but this is perhaps
the one context where I can't make fun of
them, because even there a step up from the game's
previous release on a console that never
even officially came out.
God, I feel kind of sorry for Rick Dyer.
The poor guy kept trying, and it
kept just not quite working out.
This version of the game is the one that got the sequel,
Kingdom Shadowun, released a year later
for the same consoles.
Some versions of Kingdom Part 2
Shadowun are just called Shadowun
for some reason. I also picked up a
copy of Kingdom Book 1 the Far Reaches
just to see what changes they made apart
from the title. Let's check that out real quick.
You comin' with me, boy?
This version uses more compressed graphics,
but also makes a bunch of weird changes.
Along with the title, a bunch of character
names have changed, too. The Elder Kings
are now the Argent Kings,
Téa Alkenred is now Lathan
Kandor, Druce is now
Daelin, Quode is now
Mobus, and Saucerball is
now Torlok.
Torlok has become Drake's Blood
the Wicked. Obviously, this means the voice
acting had to be redone by new actors,
and by actors, I mean whoever Rick Dyer
got to program this new version got into
a vocal booth for, like, five minutes.
Mobus is gone, but the
one who will come remains.
I am ready.
I can't verify the quote,
but apparently Dyer thought
the original names were
270s, so he changed them.
I don't think the names were the problem
with the original's release. It was probably
everything else. I can almost
see Dyer in my head trying his very best
to step as far as possible
away from the game's previous incarnation,
given its, frankly, traumatic history.
The opening sequence is now an optional
cutscene triggered at the beginning, which
ends before Druce—sorry, Daelin
makes you do the stupid bit with the doors.
When you start the game, you get a piece of all-new
animation, which looks kind of bad,
in which Téa—sorry, Lathan
gets told by Daelin about Drake's
blood seizing the throne and how you need three
artifacts to stop him. This is an interesting
change. The original game ended
suddenly partway through, and this
cutscene basically rewrites the entire plot
to be about doing the thing you
actually end up doing towards the end of the
actual amount of game they made.
Too much of the game's dialogue references the evil
wizard at the beginning, and he still appears in the game
to attack you, so they couldn't take
him out entirely. It's so weird
to have one opening talk about the evil wizard
who's now called Torlok, and then the
actual opening tells you your quest is to stop
a different bad guy who isn't called
Torlok anymore. Like everything
else about the legacy of this game, it's weird
and esoteric for seemingly no reason.
Even the name is weird. The Far
Reaches is one of the two kingdoms from the
original you don't end up going to
because the game ends on the bridge to visit them.
Why is this version called Kingdom
The Far Reaches when there's no
Far Reaches in it, and there's technically
five kingdoms? That's a plural
amount of kingdoms. I—I
wish I hadn't noticed this. It's just frustrating.
The gameplay is a bit different, too.
You now click around a map screen to decide where
to go. The first place you go is Dalen's
mansion, where the cutscene from going through
the correct door in the original just sort of
plays as if you just walked in, and he
gives you the scrolls. They also added more
complex puzzles. For example, this guy who just
talks to you in the first game is now blind,
and you get a scroll of seeing from Dalen
to use to get his advice. Dalen
also asks you which scrolls you want him to work
on next, so you actually get to make a couple
more choices than in the original, and the
use of a main map screen actually makes it feel like
you're traveling a world. Kind of.
Slightly. A little bit.
My son was your age
when he learned that the cold fire which
burns on the marsh waste can
destroy the mist monsters.
They call the land wares the mist
monsters in this version. It's like
Daya actually got my memo. Now
the puzzle is decipherable
by humans. Once you save
the princess, you get the second new cutscene
that's clearly new animation, where the princess
says thanks and invites you to stay.
I accept your gracious offer, princess.
Then,
together, they
invent fireworks.
Also, there's this really rocking
track that plays when it's trying to load the credits.
I think I want this as my new ringtone.
And the credits roll, and the game ends with the trailer for Shadowin.
So now, after covering
this new version of the game, we can actually
talk about its sequel. Its animation
style has been altered significantly, and the character
looks completely different. I have a feeling
Daya and co. wanted to further differentiate
Kingdom from Teya's Quest, and
did so by changing how everything looked when the
time came to make new animation for this sequel.
Or maybe he just had different animators
at this point. At this point, they probably either
moved on to bigger projects, or quit
and become a baker. Working as an
animator's really hard at the best of times, and
working on Teya's Quest seemed like it was a nightmare.
The sequel is basically just more
of the sort of gameplay from the previous game.
You get the other two relics, and finally,
after over a decade of waiting,
you get to kill Torlok.
Oh, come on. That was it? And then
Lathan kisses the princess from the first game,
and fireworks go off again, but there's more this time.
And credits.
Where do we go from around every turn?
Why did I make this?
Well, maybe
because it's an interesting story.
An immensely popular game that went away
so quickly that its successor was all but forgotten.
A recklessly optimistic
console in a period when home gaming
was hemorrhaging money that never even made it out the
door, and a relentless barrage
of unpronounceable names.
In June, this warehouse will come to life.
The new home video system that Rick and Jan
Dyer have banked everything on will be shipped
from here. My wife and I, as you probably
can guess, are gambling everything
we own on this, so
it's kind of scary,
but that's the sort of thing that makes you want to
succeed. Rick and his wife threw
everything they had into Halcyon,
and Halcyon took it all, took
everything, and then it was gone,
leaving them as barely a footnote
in the history of video games. Maybe
it's because I think Don Bluth is overrated,
and I find his continued attempts to revive
Dragon's Lair to be a little bit crass,
and wanted to talk about the game's actual creator
instead of the man who keeps getting the credit.
If you type Rick Dyer into
Wikipedia, you get a disambiguation
page linking to two possible
notable Rick Dyers. One of them is
ours, the video game designer. His
page is three short paragraphs
in length. The second is titled
Rick Dyer, and then in brackets,
Bigfoot.
Some guy who spread Bigfoot hoaxes
is remembered in more detail
than the inventor of Dragon's Lair.
Or maybe it's because the way
modern gaming's going right now, I'm a little
bit worried. The marketplace is only
getting bigger, and the tools of game
creation are more available than ever before,
and that means there's a lot more games competing
for people's attention. There may not be
another crash, but it's still a very
big pool for a small fish.
In any creative medium, it's scary
to work knowing that what you create
may only exist in permanent obscurity.
The people who make it might be talented,
but increasingly, they're also very
lucky. Undertale got recognized
because Toby Fox was in the right place at the
right time with an already existing following
around his Homestuck music. Dragon's Lair
did well partially on the back of that name
they put all over it. The next designer with
the talent Toby Fox had
might not be so lucky.
The ancient Romans used to tell the story of a man
called Romulus, a fantastical
figure descended from royalty,
raised by wolves who took part in all
the most important foundational
events in Roman history, and
named Rome after himself.
The Romans looked at their society and liked to
imagine that it had all been the plan
of some great genius.
The Romans believed in dozens of
mythical engines of creation.
What was one more?
Hundreds of incredible works of art have been done of
epic historical events, huge
important moments in history,
the actions of gods or supposed
men like Romulus.
One of my favorite paintings is The Lacemaker.
Johan Vermeer painted a
loving, accurate, and detailed rendition
of a girl making
lace. Vermeer celebrated
real people doing ordinary
things. He offered the
radical idea that you didn't have to be
special or important or magical
or legendary to be worth
being painted or thought about
or remembered. So it turns out
there are two ways of explaining history.
We can be like Geoffrey of Monmouth or the
early Romans and invent these
magical, wondrous, brilliant people
who gave everything to us.
A wizard made Stonehenge all by himself.
A man called Romulus
invented Rome out of whole cloth
and took part in every major historical
event required to fulfill his
amazing design.
John Bluth made Dragon's Lair.
Or we can be like Vermeer.
A bunch of ordinary,
everyday people built Stonehenge just by
working together and putting time and effort
into it. A bunch of ordinary
people make video games by working
together very hard for hours and hours
and hours and days and years to make
it. A bunch of regular, ordinary
people built Rome over the span of a
very long time, contributing
to what would later be remembered as the
exploits of one man. This way is
nowhere near as magical as the ones we like to
imagine put our world together.
The truth is often very mundane.
But maybe that's okay.
We're pioneers.
We're doing something that's never been done.
We have artists, we have writers, we have engineers,
we have technicians.
They're all working together and that has never
existed before. There's never really been a reason
for those three groups
to all coexist simultaneously.
What we're really
doing is combining art with science.
I think there's something sad but
beautiful about Rick Dyer and his dreams
of Halcyon. He calls himself
and his team pioneers in this news
broadcast, and the truth is
he's right. Pioneer
isn't an inherently positive term.
It just means you were among the first to explore
something, and that doesn't mean you were successful
or right. A lot of early pioneers
didn't make it back, and a lot
of people, a lot of us,
are going to end up more like Rick Dyer
than we'd hoped to be. So if we
can't learn to love and remember people like
Rick, we're condemning ourselves
in turn to be forgotten.
Your work might not
reach the audience it deserved, or you
might not make something anyone likes,
and it can be soul-crushing to embark on
a journey knowing you might not succeed.
But if we can learn to accept
that it's okay to try and fail,
and that people who fail are worth being remembered
and appreciated, then maybe we can
all at least learn to enjoy
the humanizing experience of failure
together.
Thank you for watching.
This video was quite a lot
of time in the making, and I can only do things
like this with the support I receive through Patreon,
so I'd like to thank my supporters very much.
In addition to the names scrolling
past the screen right now, I'd especially
like to thank...
James Adair, Nathan
and Bronwyn, xx
underscore ant fucker 69 underscore
420 xx, and you have to pronounce
the four x's, Jon
Anders Bremer, Parker Anderson,
Jenny Angel, Sheena
Artrip, Brennan Arts,
Cal Ashton,
Heba Asad, Amy B,
Jordan Barrett,
Sam Bayliss, Max
BBQ King, Finley
Bowick Copley, Graf and Blackpaw,
Big Boy, Jakutja
Boris, A Bowl of Creamy Tomato
Soup, Eric Bronner,
Chip Bush,
Hbomberguybutwithbreadedmacandcheese
hands, Hbomberguybutwith
yaoi hands, Eugene
Butler and Samuel Butler, I hope they're
related, that'd be cool, Kurt C.
Yost, John Cantwell,
Zachary Clark, Stephen
Cohn, Philip Coffey,
Krista Collin, Justin
Conkerbeard, David Craggs,
I'm Daddy's little bitch, seriously
though, I'm trapped inside of a
Cormac Delaney, Hjort
Dog, I don't know, like a butt
or something, Jason Durso,
an egg painted to look
like a man, Avi Finkel,
a fish named Nabby,
Kit Foley, The Frankfurt Shawl,
Corin Gardena, Andrew
Gilly, The God Forsaken's Strongest
Rat Alive, Eitan Goldstrom,
Zoe Gowin,
Rachel Gray, Scott
Gertin, Willow H.,
Michael H. Prey, Mark
Harmon, Rebecca Harold, Jack
Harvey, Nathan Hoare,
I, Hbomberguy, am deeply in love with
Jim Sterling and want to kiss him,
World Heavyweight Champion Patrick
the Breezy P. Finnegan, Rikard Hevosma,
Tyler Howard,
Eric Hunter, James Id,
Eden Yankovic-Sumar,
Ace Jenny, Bisotton Jenny,
General Ginger of the
Oz All-Girl Revolutionary Army,
Qui-Gon Jinn, goodnight
sweet prince, Ben Kaplan,
Dave Kemp, Sean Kemp,
Adrian Kingsley-Hughes,
Thomas Kistner, Florian
Knox, Lucas Kocken,
Renee Larshaug, Paul
Lasswell, Alex Lemkevich,
Gracie Lipscomb,
Kelly Mariella Kay,
Benedict Marko, Gary Marshall,
Tom Martell, Christopher
McDonald, Spunker McGraw,
Jacqueline Merritt,
Katie Mersacks is a cutie,
John McGnone, Garrett Mitchell,
3 5ths of a Brain, Hero
of Time 88,
Alicia Parker Martell, Justin
Partridge, Richard Pearson,
S. Peter Davis, John
Pettison, Robert Phillips,
Siegfried Slayer of the Immortal Dragon,
Kay Played Dota,
Alistair Please Play Life is Strange,
Silas Pumpkins,
Alexander R. Corbett, Totally Radical
Politics, Several Rats
Participating in an Elaborate and Daring Casino
Heist, Davis Remy,
Evan Ritchie, Lissy Roberts,
David Rose, Vandella Ridbeck,
Anna S, Super
Saiyan Rose Kamikensei,
Elijah Scanlon, Marco Schade,
Justin Schwendeman, Andrew
Scheimer, Naoto Shirogane,
Mons Silverplatz-Tunstrum,
George Soros,
The Spectre of Communism,
Mike Stanley, Niltiak's Dealer
of Souls, Ash Striker,
Daniel Sullivan,
Lord Sir Mr. Supercalifnialistic
Expialidocious of House Hanmore,
Luke Swanson,
Al Swigert, Adult Sword
Owner, Coach Tejina Carlos
Mad Dog 6 Strats RP Walk
2 Chains Kobito, David
The Benevolent Malevolence, Gar
The Internet Dog, Maria
The Maiden of Blue Fire, Jeffrey Theobald
I think Brandon is an awesome guy
and I want to be his friend
Kevin Thurber, Pio Gedig Tigrin
Avetisian, Jordan Tullis
It turns out I was wrong about everything
Handsome Unlimited, Tapio
Unto Oskari Tironen, Ryan
Van Shark, Riley Van Dyke,
Daniel Vincent Chilton, Heretic
Void, Grick Von Goul, Christopher
Wade, Jason Walter,
Thad Wazalewski, Pete West,
Catherine Wilde, Ryan William Cox
Louis Woodrow,
Don't Worry Buddy, Don't Worry Buddy, Don't Worry Buddy,
Don't Worry Bu-
Seamus Usarian, Recovering Zombie
Aesilon, Amontadillo
Kieran, Clawsu
Kabisa, Commissar Taco
Dash of Weak
Devon's Hands Melt, Femininja
Geekyapar, Get Dunked On
Gnostic Dude,
Hey It's Grace, Hero Reward
James, Jeremy
Jerry Terry, Joe
Caffsile, Catherine
Lauren, MacArthur
Minty Freakin' Fresh
Momi, Mr. Clonam
Niflet, Procore
Rue, Samael
Shadowbag, Sigma Vega Sigma
Syntharana, Sol
Soy, Swampselkie
Silian, Ure
Wackman, Wagablesmurf
Wiebke
xxx underscore swagmaster420
xxx underscore swagmaster420
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
