I'm going to go out of my way for once and talk about something positive.
I'm going to talk about a game I really, really like.
I'm going to talk about Bloodborne, and why it's amazing.
["Bloodborne Theme Song"]
["Bloodborne Theme Song Fades Out"]
["Bloodborne Theme Song Fades In"]
Okay, to start off, we're going to have to establish a baseline, aren't we?
Bloodborne's amazing, but the Souls series has always been good.
Let's start by talking in basic terms about the core gameplay.
They are, when you boil it down, basically action games attempting to recreate the same sort of stuff
RPGs like Dungeons & Dragons were designed to simulate.
Adventures in magical lands with dungeons and or dragons.
They control in a vaguely similar way to other third-person action games like Devil May Cry,
or Drakengard, or Dynasty Warriors, or even The Legend of Zelda.
However, despite superficial resemblance, in practice, the games operate very differently from those.
All the games I just mentioned here have a focus on instantaneousness, fluidity, and flow or speed.
You press the button, and the character is immediately doing the thing.
Dante is doing the stabby, or the jumpy, or the flippy as soon as you press the button commanding him to do it.
He's such a good boy.
In lots of these games, you can even cancel a move you're currently doing into another move.
So if you realized you actually pressed the wrong button, you can get away with pressing the right one,
and Dante cleans up after your mistakes for you.
It's like McDonald's or Casual Sex.
It's... fine?
You know, like, it'll do?
But outside of higher difficulties, there's this sense of never really earning anything to me.
I hit the relevant button based on when it was clearly telegraphing that I should be doing it,
and then it happened instantly.
It's missing something.
The Souls games are theoretically similar, but choose such a different core design philosophy
that I bet some of you winced when I compared them to character action games the way I just did.
When you press the attack button in a Souls game, you've not just committed to an attack.
You've committed to the long, arduous process of signing the proper paperwork to get planning permission
to start to swing your sword.
You don't immediately see dividends on the button you pressed.
You have to wait for the attack to go off.
On top of that, instead of attacking and moving being an infinite resource,
you have a limited amount of stamina you can invest at any given time.
So you can't rely on mashing the attack and dodge buttons to get by.
And then, if you press the wrong button, you can't hit undo.
You can't cancel out of an attack into the roll you should have done.
You get stabbed instead.
This creates an immediate friction between you and what you want to achieve.
You can't just hit the button when you see an opening,
or dance around and wait until one gets handed to you.
You have to learn to prepare and observe the timing of your enemy,
and be able to know when to act instead of simply acting,
or use your limited stamina resource to create an opening by dodging an early attack.
This is the main reason why the series has always been a little bit divisive.
Its deliberateness puts it directly at odds with almost every other game of its type,
which strive to make actions as quick as possible and give the player tons of control and freedom.
However, it's for this same reason that you might find a Souls game more rewarding,
because there's a genuine sense of having earned a victory once you get it.
The tools you're given for victory are more limited.
You're never going to feel like a badass who can flip all over the place or dodge infinitely any time they need to.
But this makes winning with those more limited tools more satisfying and feel like a real achievement.
There is something on a core level fun about this kind of setup that you don't really get in many other types of game.
It also creates a much deeper appreciation for subtlety.
Each Devil May Cry game, for example, has a huge array of monsters with ridiculously cool-looking moves and stuff,
but there are so many on screen at a time, and it's so easy to actually deal with them,
that there's less of a weight to an encounter.
The game only starts feeling fun on really high difficulties when only a couple of those attacks would kill you,
and you suddenly have to take everything really seriously.
Meanwhile, just this one guy in Demon's Souls could, and generally usually does, kill me.
I've had to put more thought into dealing with the red-eyed knights in Demon's Souls,
or the black knights in Dark Souls, than basically every enemy in a Devil May Cry game put together.
It's just that much more engaging.
It makes every single encounter feel dense with prediction, timing, planning, and execution.
You have to almost consider the psychology of your opponent to know the right time before you get there,
and wait out the time it takes to do the thing you wanted to do,
until you finally discover if you were accurate and everything goes as planned.
There's something beautifully orgasmic to it.
It's like cooking something difficult for yourself and sitting down and realizing you made something good,
and now it's all yours.
Every sliver of health you take from someone's meter was earned through this delicate interplay.
It's so good, writing about it required me to do the thing game critics should never do,
and start using unfitting metaphors for food and or sex.
This stuff is hard to do well, and it really shows in games where it's done poorly.
As an object lesson in bad versions of this, check out Lords of the Fallen,
a game that was very clearly made by people who saw that Dark Souls was popular,
and wanted to make one of those,
but didn't quite figure out that it actually takes a lot of effort to make this kind of game fun.
I've beaten this game all the way through twice.
This game is terrible.
Even the basic sword weapon is so slow and deliberate that it becomes a chore.
There's no light running attack at all.
Your guy just stops dead in his tracks.
The controls are so slow and clunky that I was sure my computer was simply too slow to run it,
but no, this is just how the game moves.
There are fast weapons, but they never escape the damage curve,
and you're basically either pressing the button to immediately swing,
but dealing very little damage,
or dealing more but waiting days for something to connect.
I'm used to a weapon having a light attack, which is quicker,
and a heavy attack, which is slower.
When a weapon has a slow attack and an even slower attack,
the entire feel of the game is broken.
Great swords are basically impossible to use,
except, for some reason, the running heavy attack comes out really fast,
making it essentially the fastest move in the game.
This one move carried me until I discovered the broken shield bash mechanic.
I'm actually starting to worry about the fact I beat this game twice.
I think that says something about me.
Weapons in Dark Souls are balanced so well that you don't even notice until this aspect is missing.
But it isn't just these central principles of control that make the series fun.
What's more interesting is how the world tests your ability to use these mechanics,
and thereby create the very specific feeling of adventure they do better than any other series.
Let's take, for example, The Legend of Zelda Ocarina of Time.
Maybe you've heard of it.
It's a solid game.
However, a couple of things irked me about it.
One is how there's this constant need to explain itself to you.
Every new concept, or creature, or enemy in the game is explained to you carefully,
and in an easily digestible manner.
When Stalfosses? Stalfosses? Stalfies?
Spawn to attack you, they appear at a safe distance and then jump away.
When a trap is introduced, it's shown to you in a way where you immediately know
its entire path and what it does, and so on.
The game loves to tell you in straightforward ways how it works,
or what's happening, and let you deal with it how you want.
This is, you know, fine, and I guess it's a masterpiece that I've loved my whole life.
It's very fair on the player.
But what I don't like about fairness is how it impacts the sense
that you're supposed to be on an adventure.
Link is trying to save the world by journeying into the heart of darkness
and delivering the temples from evil.
So why are the enemies taking the time to introduce themselves?
And why are the traps making sure you know where they are and what they do?
Evil is playing fair, and always being careful to show me its weak point.
Nothing is ever quite surprising in Zelda.
Maybe, for some types of games, fairness isn't actually a good thing.
In making itself too clear about what's happening and how it works,
it's probably more intuitive and playable,
but it causes it to lack a truly great dimension
of feeling like you're fighting against unknowable odds
instead of being told them all the time.
Looking back, there's something really weirdly sanitized about Zelda games.
What makes the world of any given Souls game so much more interesting
is that it doesn't play fair.
Take, for example, Mimics in Dark Souls.
The only way of learning that there are enemies in the game who look like chests
and eat you to death if you try to open them
is to find one and try to open it and die.
This isn't bad design, though,
like, oh, how dare they not give me the chance to not die there.
It's good design.
Because they've, quote-unquote,
unfairly sacrificed the player's life that one time,
they've thoroughly instilled a sense of paranoia and awareness
and given you an even greater sense of having the odds stacked against you
in a horrible world full of murder and death.
It's not that the game is unfair to players,
it's that the world itself is unfair to people.
Life is unfair in the world of Dark Souls,
and you learn that the hard way by dying in it.
After you get eaten by one Mimic,
before you know it, you'll be attacking every chest you see just in case.
And in Dark Souls 2, you can accidentally destroy a chest if you attack it too much,
meaning your own paranoia can be bad for you if you employ it the wrong way.
It creates a more full sense of paranoia
and being immersed in a world that wants you dead.
And once you make it past a difficult area,
beat a hard boss,
or successfully predict that a chest is a Mimic and destroy it,
you'll feel like you've gained ground against a genuinely dangerous world.
The Souls games don't always play fair,
but that makes besting them feel all the sweeter.
Like a genuine victory, you know?
And that feeling is worth getting killed,
unfairly, a couple of times,
because it creates the sense of there being great odds to beat.
The feeling of triumphing against adversity is increased
when that adversity has already actually killed you at least once.
This is where the idea of the game's insane difficulty comes from.
Not the game's actual difficulty,
but the way they keep introducing you to new elements
by killing you with them to create a specific sense of mood.
The only way to know there's going to be traps in this area in Bloodborne
is to step on this pile of, in retrospect, really conspicuous wood,
hear the click,
and shit yourself.
Or if you're a badass, you can dodge it and then go about your merry way.
The first time you fall for a trap, you're looking for them everywhere.
You've approached the whole game with a se-
Oh, fuck!
You've approached the whole game with a greater sense of awareness
and appreciation for its design.
You'll still get caught in a few traps,
but they'll always feel a bit like you could have done more to see them coming.
By the time you get to Cainhurst Castle,
the battlements have raised floors that look just a little bit like plates for traps,
so I avoided them at all costs.
Now, it turns out that's just what the floor looks like.
Any game that successfully makes you afraid of a quirky pavement
is unquestionably a masterpiece.
It's bred a sincere, visceral fear of your surroundings
based on how they've treated you in the past.
It's- it's wonderful.
The Souls games get into you, like, inside your head,
and all the gesticulating about crazy difficulty melts away
in the face of a fun, unforgiving,
but enriching series of encounters that test you
in ways games rarely manage to do,
an almost internal level.
You stop doing the maths about how quickly your attack goes off
and trying to figure out an opening to move,
and you start to just know the right time,
because all this stuff is so deep in your head
that you don't even have to think about it.
It becomes like an instinct.
The only experience that comes close lately is a rhythm game called Thumper.
It's dark, it's noisy, it's metallic.
It's a world of jaggedness,
like a journey through hell,
riding directly into the mouth of hell, even.
Like, that thing's a boss.
And it's very unforgiving.
You die in two hits, but at a certain point, you stop dying,
because the rhythm, the sound gets inside you.
The line between player and game feels like it's evaporated.
You begin to sense what notes are coming next,
because the music has got into you on an almost instinctive level.
You can't really sell Thumper or the Souls games
to someone based purely on their mechanics,
because the enjoyable thing about these games
is when all these things are so ingrained
that the mechanics themselves seem to fade away,
and you're fully transported into the salviatic nightmare
of sound and sight.
Salviatic.
I just made up a word
attempting to describe the feeling a game gave me.
Generally, generally that's a sign that something good is happening.
Why am I talking about Thumper, a rhythm game, here?
Well, you'll have to find out.
There's probably a reason.
Oh, God, is there a reason?
Shit, did I write that part down?
Oh, fuck, this page is blank.
I'm just...
I'm just fiddling with paper to make it sound like I wrote a script.
Shit, I forgot where I'm going with this.
And now for the reason this video was made.
I know, I make videos on purpose for a reason.
Who'd have thought?
Okay, so I'm pretty into the Souls series.
I saw lots of people playing Demon's Souls
but couldn't afford a PS3 at the time,
got on board with the PC version of Dark Souls—
yeah, that version—
but I really liked it,
and I also really like Dark Souls 2.
Um...
Okay, come on, it's—it's good.
It's—it's—
I later went back and played Demon's Souls as well
and very briefly delved into the precursor series,
King's Field, before realizing they were a bit crap and stopping.
Generally, I'd call myself a big fan.
I could talk for a long time about why the series is great.
In fact, I fully intend to do that right now.
But up until 2015, the series had a problem.
It's the kind of vague problem that's hard to talk about,
especially because I don't actually have that problem.
A lot of people seem not to really be able to get into them and enjoy them.
There's a pretty large group of people who do really like them,
then another group of people who pick every game up
but don't really get too far before getting kind of done with it,
and another group that probably don't really get them at all.
I have a sneaking suspicion that videos about Souls games
get super popular in the first place
because people watch them so they don't have to play the games
or to try to see why other people play something they don't get for themselves.
I have one friend in particular who tried all of them
and just didn't get them at all,
found them overly esoteric and difficult in a way that wasn't fun
and full of overly defensive, get-good, spouting fanboys
and just not all they were cracked up to be.
But then March 2015 happened.
Then Bloodborne happened.
Like the other games, my friend tried this one expecting to bounce off,
but instead he fell in.
He's played a ton of this game,
and I think it's one of his favorites ever,
at least based on how he seems to have finished it like 12 times or something.
But more importantly,
and this is the impetus behind this whole video, to be honest,
he went back to the other games and finally got them.
All of a sudden, he likes those as well.
And this has happened with a couple of other people too.
Some people just don't get the Souls games,
play Bloodborne,
and then suddenly have this deep and abiding passion for the whole series.
So the main purpose of this video is to try and figure out why exactly that might be.
Let's get down to brass tacks.
Let's dig a little deeper.
Did anyone else think The Princess and the Frog felt kind of like it was phoning it in?
Now I want to get into a rather heated and complex question.
Is it possible to play a game wrong?
I think this is genuinely difficult to answer.
People are going to have different experiences no matter what,
and not everyone has to like something.
But part of me also feels that there are right and wrong ways to approach a game.
But what does that mean for people who want to make good criticism
and attempt to analyze the rights and wrongs of game design
if the results are going to be so subjective anyway?
Does game design even matter if you can create the greatest game ever
but some people will just play it wrong and have a bad time?
Well, to a certain extent, that's always going to happen, isn't it?
There will always be people for whom an experience just isn't for them
or who are too dumb to understand how to play something
or don't realize that something they think is good is objectively bad.
Some people really like Fallout 3,
and they seem to be the specific type of people who think
clicking a dislike button is a decent way of expressing their feelings.
In other words, objectively stupid people like Fallout 3.
And there is a right way to play the Souls games.
You can hide behind the shield a lot,
die over and over trying to memorize every encounter,
or use magic from a distance to avoid having to engage with the game
or wear the heaviest armor and hope that'll save you.
But the reality is it's just more fun playing it as someone who dodges,
who weaves, who parries,
and who uses situational awareness to assess a situation
and maybe get out of it the first time without so much trial or error.
It's not that hard.
The Souls games aren't really all that difficult.
You dodge the attack and then you hit them with the stick.
Done.
I just solved all the Souls games for you.
Everything else is just pretentiousness about preparing to die.
I know, that's stupid.
Ignore all of that.
Oh, you think breathing fire is sexy?
Sorry, that's not in this semester.
I'm gonna have to kick you out of the school.
Is it rude of me to say there's right and wrong ways to have fun with a game?
Well, maybe.
But thanks to the magic of face cam,
I can literally see this in effect.
Here's Patrick Klepek painstakingly muscling his way
through the final boss of Demon's Souls
with his shield raised, a magic shield up,
attacking only when it's utterly safe.
When it's over, he breathes a sigh of relief.
He's glad it's over.
He's glad to be done with the game.
Was that fight fun?
It seemed torturous.
No wonder people think these games aren't for everyone
if this is how they're playing it.
Now, here's Patrick fighting a boss in Dark Souls 2
with no easy magic to help him.
He doesn't even have a shield.
He's dual-wielding maces.
Does he breathe a sigh of relief when it's over?
Well, I just came back and totally whooped the pursuer.
Of course not.
Is Dark Souls 2 such a massively more amazing experience than Demon's Souls,
or was he just playing it in a way that was less conducive to actually enjoying himself?
More importantly, what leads people to play the game one way over the other?
It's a difficult concept to deal with
because it doesn't concern the mechanics of the game itself,
but rather how the game relates its mechanics to the player,
which is far more important
and defines how the player deals with these mechanics over the course of their experience.
I covered this concept briefly in my Fallout 3 analysis,
and I realize in retrospect it was the smartest thing I said.
The first lockpick and hacking scenarios are immediately next to the means to circumvent them,
which accidentally teaches the player not to bother with these mechanics
because there's going to be workarounds
and the time or point investment is better spent elsewhere.
The lockpicking and hacking mechanics themselves are fine in a vacuum,
but you've just hamstrung the player's perception of how they surface in the game.
When you find the password in the dresser next to the computer,
you're not going to go,
oh boy, I can't wait to invest in my character's hacking abilities.
You think, wow, hacking is for idiots.
I'll just look in people's desks.
The lockpicking and hacking mechanics themselves were absolutely fine in my opinion.
They were perfectly acceptable for this kind of game,
but the actual experience of how they're introduced to the player
influences how they behave in their interactions with them,
and thereby alters the amount of fun they can have.
You play games in the manner dictated by the experience of the game itself,
and sometimes that manner isn't great.
Now, I haven't really seen anyone else writing about this psychological side of design,
and believe me, I've looked.
Even Game Feel, Stephen Swink's seminal work on good game design,
seems mostly concerned with making mechanics that look and feel and play well,
but doesn't really consider how a game causes the player
to start engaging with them in a way that's fun.
And since, from the sounds of things,
I'm basically the discoverer of this concept, right,
does that mean I get to name it?
Well, uh, I'm gonna call it Play Conditioning.
Yeah, sure.
If you've got a better name or it turns out there's a large body of work
dealing with this concept already that I just missed,
let me know and I'll go mope in the corner for a while.
This is a little different from a more well-known concept called conveyance,
which is how a game tells you what its mechanics are and what things do.
Play Conditioning, my new made-up term,
refers to how players are led to use those mechanics by how the game is executed.
I might just be splitting hairs to make it look like I came up with a new concept,
but I do feel that there's an important distinction there.
Let's take a look at the conditioning at play in the early levels of Demon's Souls.
The first boss you encounter has an unreasonably high amount of health
and can kill you in either one hit
or one and one-tenths of a hit based on your character.
And once he kills you, you don't get another shot.
You revive in the Nexus where the story properly starts.
But even if you do beat it,
you advance to this dragon and he kills you.
The lesson, no matter what, is you will die.
The game's trying to tell you that you're going to fail sometimes,
so you might want to learn from it.
It's a warning about the game's intense difficulty
and the nature of death in this game.
Embrace that it's possible and build on your mistakes.
The first time I beat the early tutorial enemies
and then pass through the fog door to meet this giant hulking monster
was genuinely kind of surprising and terrifying.
There's this moment of,
oh, shit, it's genius.
Your almost inevitable death at this guy's hand...
things
immediately communicates that you're going to be facing seemingly insurmountable odds,
which makes succeeding against them all the more satisfying.
You run into versions of this boss later in the game
and clowning on them after all the experience and weapons you've gained
is a reminder of how far you've come.
It's pretty good, but getting there requires playing the game for tens more hours,
and that's not a particularly good kind of return on your investment.
Plus, being killed no matter what at the start of a game
isn't exactly all that encouraging either.
It kind of has a negative effect on players, I feel.
Not everyone's going to enjoy being led into the game in this manner.
Okay, first enemy, first boss.
What's up, Vanguard?
Yo.
Do you think this told Patrick he should be fast and frenetic and take more risks?
The first real level also embodies this paradox.
It's a testbed for the sort of tricks and traps
that will be used against you for the rest of the game.
It's probably intended to teach you a lot about the game to come
and prime you to know what to look for and how to act.
This area here has a really obvious enemy just in front of you
that you'll be walking towards,
but there's a guy also hiding just behind the doorway.
Some games don't show you everything easily
because the challenge is to see if you think to look for it.
Countless enemies are going to hide in places
you can't quite see over the course of this game and its successors,
but after this one, you know it can happen,
and the real challenge is dealing with that possibility.
But the problem is,
if all of these ways of showing you the game can kill you do kill you,
it does feel kind of shit.
The game is still really, really good,
but it's hard to imagine a beginner who's just started a Souls game for the first time
opening up, dying to this section a couple of times,
and having a good time doing it.
It's possible that it accidentally imbued players with the lesson,
this isn't fun or fair,
and you should just give up or play it in the most boring possible way
in the hopes you survive.
Patrick played the game wrong
because he was conditioned by the experience to approach it that way.
I have to admit that I played Demon's Souls
after playing the first two Dark Souls games,
so these early sections weren't nearly as excruciating
as they would have been
if this was my first ever engagement with the series and its mechanics.
Dark Souls has this exact problem, too,
but it lessens it somewhat.
You start, fight easy enemies with a broken sword, no problem,
and then BAM!
Asylum Demon.
He's huge, and he probably kills you the first time.
To survive, you have to run past him and through a door to the side,
and then, no joke,
the first thing the game gives you is a shield.
What lesson does this instill to a player?
It says,
hide behind this to survive.
You loop back around and kill the demon
by getting the drop on it and having better weapons.
It's definitely improvement over the Vanguard,
where you get one shot, and then you're done,
because you immediately get the payoff of besting the opponent
who probably beat you at least once,
but by then the game's already kind of told you that shields are the way to go.
So it's not surprising that a lot of early players
run around with their shield up constantly
and don't really play in the kind of active, action-y way
that lends to really enjoying yourself.
You can see this play conditioning in effect with, for example,
Geopp, who Let's Played the game in 2012.
He plays very conservatively and slowly
and has his shield up even when nothing's around just in case.
He's very careful, and it takes him five videos
to get to the bonfire in Undead Burg.
And once he gets his hands on a spear,
he spends a huge portion of the game attacking safely from behind his shield.
In the description of the Let's Play,
he explains that he played a small bit of Demon's Souls before giving up.
In other words, this play style emerges
from when you experience the parts of the first two games
that seemingly condition you to play the game in the most boring way
in order to survive.
Something very telling he does is constantly discuss
when is a good time to heal
because he wants to conserve his flasks.
He learned to treat healing like that in Demon's Souls
where you could literally run out of healing items
and have none and just be screwed.
He takes a little while to fully take on board
on the instinctive level people play games
that wasting some of your Estus isn't a big deal
because it's not gone forever.
In other words, he's actually suffering in Dark Souls
because of the way Demon's Souls taught him to play this kind of game.
Critically, the entire Souls series, even Demon's Souls,
have done quite well,
but plenty of players didn't like Demon's Souls
and a few critics did agree with them.
Take, for example, Yahtzee,
everyone's favorite fast-talking English sweary man
who I'm not jealous of at all.
So in conclusion,
fuck you, Demon's Souls.
A challenge is one thing,
but trying to break down a fucking cement wall with your forehead
isn't a challenge,
it's grounds for getting fucking sectioned.
That's a pretty emphatic no to what Demon's Souls is doing,
I remember people on forums at the time echoing his feelings about it.
It's trial and error,
the combat is too punishing,
it feels overly hard,
you have to take it slow to do well,
and that just isn't fun and so on.
At this point, it's worth mentioning that,
yeah, Dark Souls did gangbusters.
It got super popular and had a massively committed following
many times the size of the one Demon's Souls ended up with,
and even Yahtzee came around on it.
But hang on a second.
Let's check out why.
After watching a decent let's play of the game,
gone over the wiki a few times,
and a six-week preparation with a team of advisors and physical trainers,
I was able to break through the wall.
And I suppose that's the first failing of Dark Souls,
that you need the fucking Cliff's Notes to get into it.
It's hard to recommend a game to someone and say,
but first, here's all the research you have to do.
Because that person's gonna say,
you know, you say this game's more fun than Zelda H-Bomb,
but Zelda doesn't require me to read any technical manuals
or peer-reviewed journals
and watch someone else play it for a few hours first.
This doesn't mean the game is bad.
Dark Souls is a very fun video game,
I hope that goes without saying at this point,
but that's a heck of a barrier for entry into that fun, isn't it?
I'm gonna quickly list the reasons why Dark Souls
does better conditioning than Demon's Souls
and helped onboard just enough people for it to get the popularity it did.
Firstly, the opening I told you about before.
You get killed by the Asylum Demon,
but you respawn just outside.
The rematch is immediate.
Instead of being killed and starting with a sense of loss and failure
as the beginning of the game,
the player is killed, but then gets to take their revenge.
Losing, trying again, and winning becomes the expectation
instead of, you know, losing.
Secondly, there's loads of great quality-of-life improvements.
Being hollow, the equivalent of a spirit in Demon's Souls,
no longer halves your life.
Demon's Souls was made much harder if you ever died and lost your human body,
so the player was punished for failure
by making it easier to fail until they get a human form back,
which is quite a rare occurrence in that game.
In Dark Souls, you have the same health
and you're free to not feel like you already fucked yourself by dying.
So, you have less to lose, so you take more risks and do better.
Also, the Estus Flask.
You had a finite amount of healing in Demon's Souls.
You either found healing items in the world
or bought them using souls, which were quite hard-earned.
Using one meant it was gone.
This made deciding to heal feel risky.
Like, if you die now, you basically wasted that healing you just used.
This made players less likely to heal,
which meant they died more, which meant they had less fun.
You could farm souls to buy more, but you know what isn't fun?
Farming items just to have enough stuff to get a proper run at the boss.
The Estus Flask regenerates every time you die,
meaning you never feel like you're actually wasting it because it'll come back.
This made players more willing to use their healing item,
which made them live longer and do better and have more fun.
Those were the main two, in my opinion.
There are more, but they're not really worth bringing up here.
If I were making a game with Demon's Souls as system of health,
I would have made your life bar and soul form your actual life bar
and have your health double when you were human,
so being human at least felt like a buff
instead of simply being able to use all of your health bar for a while.
My third reason why Dark Souls feels better is the existence of Demon's Souls itself.
I know it's a bit weird, but I think my reasoning is sound.
Demon's Souls felt to players like this weird new thing that did stuff differently,
and different doesn't always feel good to play.
Some aspects felt like active mistakes.
Why would they make the game this punishing and hard?
Why were there so many weird traps trying to directly kill me?
And so on.
Dark Souls, by being the second in a series, is viewed differently by its players.
Now all the weirdness and differentness and difficulty are justifiable.
The fact they did it twice makes it feel like, no, this is all just intentional.
Suddenly, bad ideas and weird concepts simply become staples of a series.
For a movie example, The Purge had to justify its very existence
and its concept to a fresh audience when it came out.
But The Purge 2 and 3 didn't, because they were the second and third stories in a series.
So even if The Purge 1 is worse than the others,
which, yeah...
It's worth keeping in mind that it did receive a different critical perspective than its sequels did.
Dark Souls has slightly better play conditioning,
but it's still quite clearly not that great at it.
So it isn't just that Bloodborne is a better game than the others,
although that is kinda true in my opinion,
Bloodborne changes people's perspectives on a more subtle level.
I have a theory about this ga-
No, I have a hypothesis about this game.
Bloodborne teaches you how to enjoy Souls games.
Let me show you just a couple of the design differences that seem small,
but have a massive, MASSIVE difference on the mindset of players.
Firstly, the most obvious one.
There's no shield.
Where is it? It's not there!
This isn't how these games work!
You don't start the game with a shield at all, no matter what.
This is genius!
This is...
It's a spicy meatball of game design goodness!
Normally food metaphors are bad,
but I can literally taste the design genius here.
The shield has been the bane of the Souls series from the very start.
It's the true villain,
and it's precisely because of its function and use.
Let's go back.
Ah, the shield. A classic.
You hold a button down and you're immediately protected from obvious harm you're facing.
There's a parry mechanic,
which you can use to make an enemy completely exposed and hit them for way more damage.
But why take the risk?
You can just block the attack,
and then attack when there's an opening.
Just wait!
You can do a dodge roll,
but you're only immune to getting hit for a few frames.
Why bother when you can just stand there and be fine?
This game's not so hard.
Just hold the shield button.
Welcome to having a shitty time.
The fun, frenetic dodge mechanic and the incredibly engaging parry stuff
is immediately foreclosed by a much safer option.
Not necessarily better,
but for early players, safer.
A good deal of players will spend a lot of time with their shield up,
playing it safe,
waiting for only the best possible moment to drop it,
strike,
and then bring it back up again.
The shields only get bigger and more defend-y.
They seem to actively encourage using one more rather than less over time.
One reason why early players gravitate towards spears
is because you can even use them while the shield is up.
It's encouraging the players to turtle up,
play very, very slowly,
and just not have a good time.
This is one major reason why people don't enjoy these games.
They tell you you're going to die a lot,
and then hand you a means of protecting yourself,
and the immediate assumption is that you should,
you know,
use it.
But it makes for boring, slow play.
You could try parrying,
or just put the shield away and have fun using the other options available to you,
like two-handing the sword,
but the game doesn't really seem to encourage doing it, does it?
No shield means no one is safe.
You have to dodge,
and your offhand weapon is now a gun
whose sole use,
unless you spec your character a specific way,
is for parrying.
Parry,
or dodge,
or die.
No easy, boring path at all.
You now have no choice
but to play the game the fun way.
Welcome to the fun zone.
I just, I, I can't believe it.
Like,
can you imagine being in the room
when Hit Attacker Miyazaki was looking at playtest footage of the previous games,
and coming up with the concept for Bloodborne,
and he was like,
hey,
hey,
take out the shields.
Like,
what?
Nani?!
Hit Attacker?!
How will people defend themselves?
By learning to play the game in a way that's actually fun, mate.
That's how Japanese people talk,
with that exact accent.
No shields, ever.
None.
Okay, one shield,
but it's a joke.
Put a joke in the arm description about them engendering passivity.
Passivity.
God, I can't do this voice.
Sorry.
Broad strokes, let's think about what lesson these games teach you.
Demon's Souls hands you a sword and shield,
and then kills you,
and tells you you're going to die a lot.
Dark Souls kills you,
and hands you a shield.
Bloodborne kills you,
and hands you a blade,
and a gun.
It's commonly said that the best defense is a good offense,
and while I'm currently on trial for taking that concept too seriously,
it's certainly true here.
It's just genius.
It's always been possible to play without a shield.
Two-handing a weapon,
or dodging,
or parrying,
has always been viable,
and always been more fun and fluid than using the shield,
but they're just harder enough compared to putting the shield up
that most people don't want to take the risk,
and thus end up playing the whole game like this.
At which point, how far you get through these games
becomes a question of how committed you are to being bored,
and there are people who've always played the games like this,
but they tend to have needed a long time
to figure out this style of play and really get into it.
By removing shields,
players are funneled into that particular play style far quicker,
and what's magical about this
is that this mindset carries over to the previous games.
The incredible potential of the series is made available to people
without the need to figure out that play style for themselves
by investing tons of time into an experience
that starts out feeling kind of plodding.
This is one reason why the early Demon's Souls and Dark Souls 1 community
seems so hardcore and committed,
because previously, the only sort of person
who would stick with early Demon's Souls or Dark Souls
long enough to get to the place where it's actually fun
is the kind of person who's willing to invest a lot of time
into something that starts out not all that fun,
and that takes a certain type of person.
The early fan base of the Souls series is a bunch of weirdos
because that's the only type of person the series could attract early on.
No offense intended here.
I'm one of those people, okay?
I'm just being self-aware.
Without making the experience all that much easier,
in fact, by making it harder by taking the shield out,
Bloodborne opens up the fun way of experiencing this type of game
to more people,
and that's just magical, isn't it?
Don't you think?
I'm still reeling from it, to be honest.
Like, what level of genius does a man have to be operating on
to be able to go,
okay, I've thought about it,
and by removing a key aspect of our game series,
we're gonna vastly improve the experience,
not just of this game,
but of all the previous ones,
because people will go back and play them that way
and have a fucking great time!
Like, oh my god!
Isn't- I- I'm sorry.
I try not to, like, screech too much in my videos anymore.
People- people say it sounds fake,
even though that is actually just how I talk,
but I just can't not.
It's- it's so brilliant.
Woo!
One in, done.
Praise the mace.
Now, I don't know which Patrick you'd vote for president of the school council,
but I already cast my vote early.
I have a- a mail-in vote to the- the vidi- video game school.
Complementing this just genius system is rallying.
If you get hit, that section of lost health lingers there for a while,
and you get some of that health back if you hit an enemy.
You can theoretically get it all back almost every time.
This feels, at first, like a simple gimmick, right?
But think about how it impacts the player's sense as they play the game.
Now when you get hit, you don't immediately think to back off and heal
and just break the flow of the combat.
In every Souls game before that, that's the reaction.
Now you can keep going.
You can take your health back from the guy who hit you.
Bloody blimey!
Like, now you always have the option of being a little more vicious and getting away with it.
It's hugely impactful on the flow and action of combat.
Combined with the loss of shields, you're carefully encouraged into a mindset
that's just more aggressive and tactile and fun and more big, fun-sounding words.
It's not even a huge difference, is it?
But it results in an improved approach to combat that's more satisfying for players
and which, like not using a shield, carries back over to the previous games.
Bloodborne at times feels like a tutorial for how to play the previous ones
because even when you take rallying out,
killing an enemy before healing is generally a smarter option anyway.
You've been forced to get good the way people used to have to be obnoxious
and hammer away for hundreds of hours to achieve.
The developers of Bloodborne didn't blame players for playing it badly.
They blamed the game, and then they fixed it.
The other way players subtly influenced is the slight change in the way weapons work.
Quick weapons feel responsive and larger weapons feel slower and more deliberate,
but there's a genuine sense of weight and power when you pull them off.
But the edges have been rough at times.
The biggest problem has been the array of weapons available.
There are, in my opinion, a bit too many.
There's a bunch of different kinds of sword,
all with slightly different or majorly different animations.
Maces, rapiers, spears, greatswords, ultra greatswords,
ridiculous fuck-off big berserk reference swords,
battle axes, hand axes, stupid axes, and so on.
The variety initially seems fine,
but in practice it means you have to figure out and remember
dozens of different timings and animations and ranges
for both one-handing and two-handing all these weapons
in order to know which you prefer or which one is best for each scenario.
It's not particularly inviting to players,
and did we really need three very similar versions of the same moveset
when one would have had more clarity and been less cluttered?
Did we really need a bastard sword and a claymore?
Bloodborne solves this handily from, like, eight different directions at once.
Firstly, there's nowhere near as many weapons, but all of them are unique.
There are variations, like the saw cleaver has the saw spear
and the Kirkhammer has Ludwig's holy blade,
but even they feel different enough.
But they don't make you feel like you've lost out
on tons of variations you could have experimented with
because the weapons all have alternative forms
that increase the versatility of each individual weapon
and even give you moves that let you switch between them
as you're attacking, which is really cool.
Every weapon has an amazing amount of moves and uses,
but you're never overwhelmed
because no weapon is clearly worse or better than any other anymore.
I'm looking at you, sword that you get
that's the same moveset as a starting sword
but is just better for no reason.
There's no longer a really obviously better version
of the weapon you were already using
you now have to switch to later on because it's underleveled.
But overall, these changes gently coax players
into feeling like the choice they made is valid
instead of living in constant fear that they're hamstringing themselves.
The saw cleaver can be your endgame weapon,
and you can become intimately knowledgeable with its use
and never have to worry if you should actually be using something else
and the weapons are unique and varied enough
that they never feel samey even if you use them for the whole game.
If you really like generic swords, there's one in there.
It just happens to be able to turn into a cool weapon.
The downsides of each weapon are almost always clear and understandable.
You know, the Kirkhammer's huge but a bit slow.
The sword cane is really quick and has a whip state that has a huge range
but it doesn't deal all that much damage.
Okay, there is one thing.
The Tornatrus is weird.
It's actually my favorite weapon.
Its alternate form is it doesn't have one.
It just becomes briefly electric.
It's generally pretty strong and fast
and knowing when to take the time to electrify it for even more damage is great.
Its downside is really silly though.
It has a low durability and it goes down quicker than normal weapons
meaning you have to repair it more often
by returning to the hunter's dream and fixing it up.
But it doesn't deteriorate that quickly and repairing costs next to nothing.
It's at worst a hassle.
That's not really much of a downside.
I get that it's trying to make it a weapon you have to use sparingly.
I think that's a neat idea.
But in practice, it doesn't lose durability fast enough to be a major issue
and it's annoying to go to fix when it does get low.
Dark Souls 2 actually had a better system
where resting at a bonfire restored your weapons each time
and durability was lower all round.
So you really did have to take that into consideration
and some weapons really could only be used sparingly during a single run.
Instead of with the Tornatrus, which is basically a really good weapon,
you have to repair a bit more than usual,
which is just not a huge downside.
I think this would have been even better
if they'd ripped off Dark Souls 2 a little more
and had durability that comes back when you die every time
but goes down even faster
so you really did have to pick the times
to pull out the Funtime Electric murder death stick.
I think maybe the over-the-top dislike some fans exhibited towards Dark Souls 2
caused the developers to walk back on ideas that were genuinely better.
Okay, I—I—I—I—
I could spend a good deal of this video defending Dark Souls 2.
In fact, um, I—like half of the script is me doing that
but I do have some sense of when a video is getting to be too much
so I've cut all those bits out
and I'm gonna compile a video looking at the central complaints about it
and why all of them are wrong and lies from criminals
and I'm gonna put that up in a separate video a bit later on.
When that comes up, I'll put the link here.
So, okay, cool.
Back to Bloodborne.
While I have already talked about how great the weapons
have always generally felt in Souls games,
a couple of attacks and moves still felt just a little bit like traps.
Moves you really should not use under any circumstances
because you'll never be in a position where they're actually useful
or they're just ridiculous.
Especially with the larger weapons
and the second or third moves of their heavier attack strings.
The second heavy swing of the two-handed dark blade is a honeypot,
a sexy, powerful trap designed to bait you into being killed
for attempting to actually use it.
Almost every weapon has multiple swings for its R2
even if it shouldn't
because how often is that attack gonna get the chance to go off in this action game?
Giving players that option will cause them to try and use it
and suffer the consequences in a way that doesn't really feel fun.
Giving the players the option to do this is inviting them to get killed.
Bloodborne makes a lot of subtle changes here.
Firstly, the R2 is no longer an attack with second or third swings.
It's very definitively just a single move.
It takes away the inherent tension of not knowing if you should be mashing R1
or doing the strong but slower ones and seeing how many you can get in.
It makes it immediately intuitive that you should be doing the quicker attacks
and finishing with the strong one
or using it when you know a great place for its particular timing.
This moveset is slightly more limited than the previous games
but in a way that's good
because it means players aren't getting bogged down
by moves that are actually useless
but beg you to keep using them because you technically can use them.
So even though you can only do one,
if you're given a big window,
you can still maximize damage with it by charging it up.
However, quick weapons or weapons with different properties
aren't hamstrung by this.
The whip function of the sword cane doesn't charge
and can combo into a second move
because as a relatively quick weapon,
the idea of doing more than one attack with it
isn't inherently a trap.
A cute extra thing I've noticed
is that with the really heavy weapon,
there is a second R2.
If you fully charge Ludwig's Holy Blade,
there's a second attack that can come out after
but only if you fully charged it.
I like this move because it's an acknowledgement
that if you're in a position
where you just fully charged a very slow and deliberate attack
and you did just hit someone with it,
you're probably in a position
where you might as well have access
to another slow but powerful move.
To my recollection,
this is the only weapon with this property.
It's really cool.
The fully charged R2 is so strong already
that it also usually staggers whoever was coming for you.
So that second attack is basically a reward
for mastering one of the most careful moves in the game.
It's also worth mentioning that the weapon upgrade system
is no longer a horrifying nightmare
where you can make a weapon into a crushing weapon
or a fire weapon or poison or magic
or an enchanted weapon.
Yes, those are both different things in the same game.
Or a crystal weapon?
Or a mundane weapon?
A dark weapon?
Half of these options will actively ruin your weapon
unless you've built your character a certain way,
and the resources you expend doing this are rare enough
that you can't afford to waste them.
I get nervous whenever I'm at a weapon upgrade screen
in a Souls game, and that's maybe not great.
Bloodborne keeps the straightforward aspects
of the upgrade path.
You spend blood echoes and bloodstone shards
to make your weapon just generally better and bloodier.
But there are also gems that you can put on a weapon
to change its properties,
but they explain what they do in simple,
easy-to-understand ways,
and they can just be taken out.
So experimentation with weapons
is actively encouraged for once.
This relatively simple change
makes the whole game feel a lot more inviting.
You know you aren't going to render a weapon unusable
or waste one of the two or three magic stone upgrade things
you'll get in the space of playing,
and that makes you more willing to experiment and mess about,
and that just—it just feels better in a big way.
On top of this, the designs of the enemies you fight
have themselves been altered
to force you to play the game in a more fun manner.
Here are some of the generic enemies
from the previous games.
They like to attack a very specific, simple way.
They walk up to you,
and then they engage a rather simple attack.
More importantly, when they're done approaching you,
they kind of stop moving.
Dodging backwards is an effective way
to get out of their range
and free up some time and distance.
Lots of bosses behave like this as well.
Get out of their range while they're attacking you,
and you're in a safe zone of sorts.
Fast forward to Bloodborne.
Most enemies move very differently
in an arguably more realistic manner.
When even early enemies attack,
they continue moving forward,
stumble ahead and stuff.
Dodging backwards as early as the main area
is a recipe for danger.
The game immediately tells you
that you have to think harder
about how you're dealing with these attacks.
The second boss most people encounter,
Gascoigne, is intensely good at this.
Both versions of this fight,
both before and after he transforms into a monster,
have attacks where dodging backwards
leaves you primed to be attacked again.
In monster form,
almost all of his attacks launch him further forward.
The only way to succeed against this guy
is to get good at parrying him
or learn to dodge to the side
or even forward through his attacks
with your momentary invincibility
to get in a strike of your own.
Or you could keep trying to dodge backwards
and complain that the game doesn't let you escape.
My first few attempts at Gascoigne
were the least fun I'd had in the series
because, as someone who regards themselves
as a seasoned Souls player
where dodging backwards was how I survived,
this was the first major stumbling block of the game.
It forced me to unlearn a style of play
that was, in retrospect,
conservative and uninteresting
and honestly was worth forgetting.
By the time of the attempts
where I was close to winning,
I was having more fun
than any other encounter in previous games
because the way I played was more engaging
and felt faster and more fluid.
I was choosing not to try to escape a skirmish
because the enemy wouldn't let me do it so easily.
Instead, I was staying close
and getting in my own hits
and ignoring when I was taking damage
because I knew I would get it back
just by continuing the fight and hitting them.
Defeating Gascoigne is a genuine victory,
and once you've done so,
you've proven that you're capable of approaching battle
in a way that's actually fun and quick and fast.
You can't hang back and shoot spells at him
and just not learn anything the whole game
and be generally bored.
You have to, well, learn to play the game
the way many people have always played these games,
but which doesn't come naturally.
I could stop right here.
You can already see the point, can't you?
When you pick up Bloodborne,
the first couple of hours
of using these altered mechanics
and mastering them train you
to play not just Bloodborne,
but any game in the series
in a manner that's actually fun.
After years of hitchhiking,
normal people have finally been handed the keys
to the Souls games,
and that's a really good thing
because these games are good.
They just previously never quite showed people
why they were good
or how to play them in a way that felt good.
I feel that this is why my friend liked it more
and then went back and liked the rest,
why people who couldn't get into any of them
could get into this one
at least a little more
even if it still wasn't really their thing.
In his review of Bloodborne,
Yahtzee says this.
"...from software who have been doing one specific thing
for about four games now.
Fortunately, it's a thing I'm into
because I like explorative
metroidvania-style gameplay,
I like subtle storytelling,
I like banging my head against a wall
with a scary monster drawn on it."
Trying to break down a fucking cement wall
with your forehead isn't a challenge,
it's grounds for getting fucking sectioned.
"...from Demon's Souls to Dark Souls
to Dark Souls 2 to Bloodborne.
Same shit, different anus."
Dark Souls 2 is the third game
in a series that began with Demon's Souls,
which I was thinking I should go back
and try again sometime.
Ooh, maybe you should have given Demon's Souls
a proper shot.
What a fantastic idea, you piece of shit.
I'm not actually criticising Yahtzee here,
although I guess I kind of am
because he didn't give Demon's Souls
a fair shot in the first place.
I'm using his transition to show how
this is just how perception of a game
can change over time
when it gets iterated upon.
This transition and why it happened is valuable.
Yahtzee's gone from hating Demon's Souls
and thinking it's trial-and-error bullshit
that isn't fun,
to claiming it's part of a series he really likes
and which, in his opinion, are all very similar.
Good play conditioning can cause a player
to suddenly want to commit
to an experience superficially very similar
to the one they previously really didn't.
This is why Bloodborne is amazing.
It's trained people to engage the game
in a way that makes the experience worth having.
Some games can be a good experience,
but not very good at bringing people into it.
Isn't it somewhat possible
that there are many great games
that slip through the cracks
simply because they didn't fully prep the player
to properly play and enjoy them?
Maybe there's a right way to play every game.
At the very least,
there's a right way to play a Souls game,
and Bloodborne finally teaches players
what that way is in a straightforward manner.
Okay, gonna be honest,
that's my core argument.
I think I just summarised it in about 40 minutes,
which, all things considered,
is pretty short for me.
But while I'm here talking about Bloodborne,
I might as well summarise
the less condition-y reasons why it's so great
and get more into the general reasons.
Let's talk about the rest of the stuff.
The Souls games in general, except for two,
have this tendency to not really
have an interesting story to me personally.
They're like,
oh, you have to stop the king.
He went bad and or mad.
All the characters you meet are mostly hangers-on
who are also messing about in this doomed world.
They tend to be interesting,
but I could honestly take them or leave them.
The story's extra wrinkles feel like
they don't really add any value to the experience itself
and are more just interesting stuff
you can write wikis about later.
There's an overall sense that all the fun stuff
in the story has already happened,
and while it was probably interesting
and it's cool to find out about,
the player is essentially given a walking tour of a world
where all the cool stuff has already happened.
All the major players in the story are either dead
or hanging out waiting to be killed by you.
Bloodborne is interesting
because you're not on any singular quest.
No one tells you to kill a bunch of people to do this stuff.
The game even makes a joke
about how unnecessary the story is,
but the dude's unwillingness to share the truth with you
is actually a clever setup
for how this guy is maybe himself not super trustworthy.
The story is happening at you instead of in the past.
You're actively trying to uncover
what's happening as you play,
not because it might be interesting
to find out about in general,
but to have a grip on what's happening
and what result my actions are having on the world.
There's a real sense of time passing
over the course of the game
as the night progresses
and the people locked in their houses
get more worried or sicker
or begin to transform into monsters themselves.
There's this game called Ocarina of Zelda Legend of Ti-
Wait.
There's this game called Legend of Zelda Ocarina of Time
and in it, there's this place called Hyrule Castle Town.
It's a small and simple area,
especially by modern standards,
but there's so much character and life to it.
Even for an N64 game,
there are cool stores and side quests
and just people hanging out having a good time
and that music.
It feels like a place full of life.
One thing games like Dark Souls lack
is this idea that there's even a world
worth fighting for somewhere.
The entire world of the games are empty nightmares
populated only by the dying,
the dead,
the undead,
the mad,
the sad,
the monstrous,
and Scottish people.
Link is being told he's supposed to help Zelda save the world
and he is a world worth saving.
Hyrule Castle Town stuck with me,
mainly because when you pull out the Master Sword
and time advances and you go outside...
It's become this horrible place.
Only three things in this era of gaming
ever gave me genuine chills of fear.
The terrifying werewolf monster thing
that attacks you out of nowhere in Castlevania 64,
the landmine with eyes in Banjo-Kazooie,
which legitimately scared me a lot as a kid,
and coming out of the Temple of Time
to discover that the lovely, happy town
had been reduced to this.
It shocked my tiny mind,
seeing it just change like that.
That ability to imbue a sense in a player about a place
is really important, I think.
Now, Bloodborne doesn't have a section
where you see what the town was like
when things were nice,
but by starting just a little bit off-kilter,
just a little bit covered in monsters,
you see that there is something worth saving in there,
and as those things start to disappear
and things take a Lovecraftian turn,
there's that same sense of loss
that things have gotten so much worse.
And I love Lovecraft.
He was my favorite author when I was 14
until I noticed that no one was actually impressed
when I would say sanguine instead of red.
In retrospect, he's not as great a writer as I remember,
and he's kind of one-note,
but his writing has inspired a wealth
of fantastic designs and stories over the years
that take liberties the way he didn't
and maintain the same sense of terror at the unknown
while having other less-secretly-super-racist stuff in there, too.
And Bloodborne is one of those fantastic stories.
It has a sense of cosmic terror
that only appears in the third act,
but when it comes, it comes in a big way,
making it super surprising and harder-hitting
than it would have been if it had started out that way
or been super predictable about it.
Oh, it's horrible.
Birth imagery. I hate it.
The world design is great as well.
Okay, Dark Souls.
Interconnected world.
Lots of alternate paths and secret ways into other areas.
It's great.
But you know what sucks?
Backtracking all the way across it again
because you died and there's no bonfire anywhere near it.
Too much time is spent walking back and forth
through areas you've already visited,
and the world never really changes,
so you're seeing the same area over and over,
except sometimes you're seeing it backwards.
I know the entirety of Dark Souls' world like the back of my hand.
That's not because it's super memorable or interesting,
but because I had to walk through all of it a lot
to get to newer places or because I died again.
Demon's Souls, in my opinion, was actually better.
There's basically no backtracking.
There's no interconnectedness either.
Each archstone takes you to a different area,
and you go in a linear path to the end and then leave.
It doesn't have pretensions of being interconnected or one big world
and instead focuses on making levels that are interesting
and engaging to play through the very first time.
Demon's Souls is a little bit harder than Dark Souls
because the creators of Dark Souls at some point realized
that people would be fighting through each level
several times forwards and backwards
and eventually people would just want to run past most of it
to get where they were trying to go.
So they designed areas where running away tended to work out pretty good.
Demon's Souls is almost hard-coded to destroy you if you try that shit.
But the trade-off is the encounter itself is more challenging and rewarding
because it's designed to be approached once from one particular direction.
I will take good level design over an open feeling world
I'll have to backtrack through constantly every single time.
The best areas in Dark Souls, Sen's Fortress and Anor Londo,
don't really interconnect with anywhere
and instead they're mostly a straight shot from where you start to meeting the boss.
It's the best area precisely because,
since the developers only intend for you to fight all the way through it
once in one direction,
it feeds you encounters precisely primed to challenge you in a specific way
instead of having to be designed
so you could come through in any direction to go somewhere else
which loosens what you can really do.
Anor Londo feels a bit like a remake of some sections of the Boletarian Palace
and I wish more sections were willing to be more linear
and just be more interesting that first time.
Fighting your way back out of Blighttown
or running all the way back through the door Havel's guarding
just to get to the Darkroot Basin is annoying
and just generally uninteresting.
Especially when it's for the eighth time.
I'm still in a dream...
Dark Soul...
Darkroot Basin in general feels kind of dumb.
It's just a big area mostly empty of stuff to deal with
with some kind of simplistic enemies dropped there.
If I wanted to have a bad time running through a mostly empty world
I would just play Monster Hunter.
The Darkroot Basin also has the most dumb boss in the game
who has two attacks they do over and over
and which basically miss even if you're standing still.
Bloodborne combines both of the best elements of each game.
It's never got any areas that are too open and have nothing in them.
Even areas taking place in the forest are dense
with well-made and challenging encounters
and let's not forget actual traps
that seem like they were laid out for a person.
Jesus! No! No!
Oh, I saw it just as I stepped on it.
Backtracking is reduced because there are more lanterns
and while areas are interconnected
many sections are essentially straight shots to the next area
with short side paths containing items.
So you have a big open world that feels interconnected
but surprising amounts of linearity.
So you can have areas like this that only work
if you're approaching from one direction
so all these enemies are actually waiting and hiding for you
and shoot at you.
Coming back through this area would be weird
but you never have to think about that
because you never have to.
You can teleport around easily.
There's quite a delicate sense of linearity
and traveling across areas you've already visited
because you have a key or some new thing has been unlocked by your actions
and thanks to a mechanic I'm going to call the knight
where an actual story progresses as you kill bosses
and the effects of your growing pool of insight too.
Even pre-visited areas are a little bit different
either visually or otherwise.
Enemies change around, get glowy scary scythes
and red versions of sticks
or just go to sleep.
So the experience of going back through Cathedral Ward
to go to a new area is valuable
because it's changing and you're seeing things being different.
You're not just revisiting it or going through it again
but backwards to get to the next new area.
Okay, also co-op isn't garbage anymore.
Trying to summon friends in these games has always been super annoying.
You have to hope you're on the same server
or the servers are even up anymore.
You have to go human or consumer humanity
and sit at the bonfire and go human
and hope you see their summon sign
and then maybe you'll summon someone to help with Ornstein and...
Smeg.
But as you can tell from this footage it didn't work
and I died on the way to summon Solaire
and I didn't have any humanity left to try it again
so I had to do it myself
and by do it myself I mean get fucked.
Also being human makes it so you can be invaded by other players.
You know what sucks?
That becoming human,
the thing you do if you need help with something you're having trouble with
is also the thing that invites in more people to gank you to death.
Like, no thanks.
I can see the idea of it being cool and risk-reward
but it's actually shit
because it means you can be invaded
before you even get to find someone you can summon
and if I'm summoning at all I'm already having trouble.
Bloodborne's co-op feels like it was actually made by people
who assumed other people might want to use it.
There's no human or inhuman state anymore.
Instead, if you need a hand, you ring the please help me bell.
Uh, in Britain we're actually all given one of those at birth.
And if someone else is ringing the help people bell
they're pulled in to give you a hand.
It's simple and you don't have to mess about looking for signs anymore.
Only after summoning can you get invaded
so you have someone helping you with the area you're obviously finding difficult
and the new person coming to get you
at least definitely has to deal with two of you
which seems a bit more fair.
And if you want to co-op with a specific person
you can both enter a password of your choosing and go.
Also, insight seems to be a less rare resource
than all the others in previous games
so it's less likely you're gonna run out of your ability to ask for help
which is a really good idea.
Oh, and since insight is tied to certain enemies getting harder
if you need a lot of help you're lowering it
so things will eventually let up.
Not much, but it's nice.
It's really nice.
Also, the sound design.
It's just brilliant.
Everything.
The monster howls.
The trick weapons clicky-clacking into their alternate forms.
The thunderous pounding of the machine gun.
The squelching of the monsters getting slit up by me.
The extra diegetic
that plays when you parry someone successfully.
The squeal of the tonitrus as it comes alive and thirsts for crime.
It's all great.
I hope the sound designers get to write a book about the work they did
making this game feel so great.
And in 10 years, once I know enough Japanese
to be able to comprehend basic sentences
I'll even be able to read it.
The key thing that proves the power of the sound in this game
is that these crow enemies are like regular-looking crows
if a bit oversized.
They attack by fluttering at you with their wings.
But they do this when they attack you.
These crows are a nightmare.
They hide in just the right places
and they make just a loud and horrifying enough noise
that it never feels like they're an easy enemy to deal with.
They're always just scary.
They even come close to the fucking landmine.
Fucking Jesus Christ.
It's just great stuff.
There's a section in Yahoo! Ghoul where I just had to stop and listen.
There's ominous, distant, pseudo-diegetic chanting,
vague screams and cries in the distance.
It's really quite something.
I don't like describing games as atmospheric
or dripping with atmosphere or anything like that.
That feels kind of like a cop-out.
But even attempting to describe the feeling of standing still in an area
has caused me to slip into this really subdued tone.
To me at least, that says something about the game's ability to communicate.
It says something about the game's command and attitude.
Also, because I'm standing in an area where I just cleaned out a bunch of enemies,
ghosts keep appearing and shooting in my direction
because they're still fighting them, and I think that's kind of funny.
Okay, finally, the big monster boss fights.
Souls games are bad at these, in my opinion.
I get it, a lot of people like the Gaping Dragon and think he's cool
and there's a, you know, they're interesting-looking.
But in my opinion, they're not that great to fight, which is the important bit.
I often refer to as the dudes-in-armor argument
that Souls games feature too many enemies that are just dudes in armor.
But in fights, monsters and the big, cool, weird enemies
don't react in a manner that makes sense to me as a player.
Human enemies respond when you hit them with your sword,
but Sif, for example, doesn't seem to even flinch most of the time.
Even the final boss flinches when you hit him, so you at least know it's working.
I am making some of the mightiest swings you can possibly imagine right now
using my character, who incidentally I named Brexit,
and she's like, eh, whatever.
I'm gonna continue moving like it's a normal thing.
No selling all my best moves, just like all the other women in my life.
Even Sif is negging me.
And suddenly she's limping.
I mean, oh, it's so sad.
Oh, it's a sad dog, etc.
But where was this kind of reacting before?
And you can't parry monstery enemies of any kind either.
It took me major trial and error for me to even determine
if you could parry the Snake Men in Sen's Fortress.
By the way, the answer is yes, but only some attacks.
The Dark Souls wiki even has an extensive list of what creatures you actually can parry
and what attacks you can parry.
I get that not everything you're fighting is technically humanoid
or has a weapon that you can parry in a traditional sense,
but it still feels really lacking in my opinion
that you can't use one of the most interesting mechanics in the game
against, like, half the enemies.
You can kind of parry monsters' attacks.
It causes them to do a bit less damage,
but seriously, what the fuck?
If you have a pseudo parry mechanic,
just let me fucking parry this guy.
Jesus.
The timing is often incredibly hard.
Like, literally harder than putting your shield up or dodging,
and all it does is cause you to take reduced damage?
Like, what?
Bloodborne finally sorts that shit out.
It makes monstrous enemies react better to being attacked,
even bosses, where you can suddenly do cool things
like break individual limbs.
When you finally topple Dark Beast Pal to the ground
because you knocked him so completely off balance,
there's a real sense that you've gained an upper hand
and rattled his...bones.
On top of that, you can now parry most of these enemies.
Even bosses can often be parried.
That's what let me finally beat the blood-starved beast
after an embarrassing amount of attempts.
I personally never got bored with dudes in armor.
Like, that was just the most fun type of fight
in the Souls series thus far.
It wasn't broken, but Bloodborne fixed it
by coming up with many different kinds of monster,
but making the fights feel super responsive
to your actions within them.
I haven't played Dark Souls 3 yet
because I wanted to make this video first,
but I hope that if it does have more monstery-type enemies,
it has this kind of responsiveness also.
I would honestly prefer to have even more dudes in armor
than bad dogs or bad rats.
Oh, no, not that! No!
Okay, also, the blood vials is just a great healing system.
Or just all the way through.
Like, I talked before about how the Estus Flask
is really, really good
because it's an infinite source of health,
but the trade-off there is there aren't any items
you can then also use for healing.
You just have that finite resource.
What I quite like about Bloodborne's system
is you have a lot of healing items,
but they're finite.
You have enough that it's not ever a huge problem,
but you can theoretically run out.
So it becomes more like,
but you always have enough vials to get your health back
almost all the way after an encounter
so you can keep going.
But on top of that,
you are really likely to pick blood vials up
as you go in fights with people.
For example, in this section, I lose a ton of health,
but I get all the vials back as a result of the fight,
so it feels balanced.
And since they don't always drop,
I am eventually supposed to get better.
I don't, but still.
One issue in Demon's Souls that kind of made it broken
was you could, at a certain point,
buy a hundred of the best healing item
and just carry them around
and basically be invincible.
Which, I mean, is maybe a problem
if a game is supposed to be challenging.
Bloodborne kind of fixes it
by giving you a really good healing item
and giving you quite a lot,
but having an upper limit on how many
you could ever possibly have.
So I feel like Bloodborne might have perfected the system
by giving you a lot of a finite amount of thing.
However, it is possible to run out
and have to farm for them,
which isn't so great.
In my opinion, they could have had it
so you always start with 20 or even 10 blood vials
and continue to pick them up the way you do now.
But that would completely take away the idea
of being able to stock up on them
and use them like a regular item
and sell them and stuff,
so maybe there's a reason why they didn't do that.
I mean, maybe the game designers did stuff on purpose.
I don't know.
Blood vials also heal a set percentage
of your maximum health,
so they're always a useful source of healing,
unlike, for example, the Crescent Moongrass,
which is just piss.
Also, you heal a lot faster.
In previous games, they wanted healing
to be like this risk-reward thing
where you stop,
so if you want to heal,
you're taking a huge risk in leaving yourself open.
But it seems like they settled in Bloodborne
of having it be a really quick thing
you can do almost any time
and just forgiving you for that.
And that's okay.
Maybe it theoretically makes it less challenging
in some ways,
but it's worth it
because it means you don't die while healing,
and that just feels bad,
even if it's your fault.
But since they took that out,
now you only ever die because you failed to dodge
or because you were attacking
when you shouldn't have done,
and that, I think, feels a lot better.
🎶
There are still some criticisms I have of Bloodborne, though,
where it falls short or seems to take a step back.
Here's a kind of big thing.
I'm a little disappointed by the NPC encounters.
The NPCs in Souls games have about as much health as you,
or at least an amount that seems fair.
However, they can do things like heal.
It's fun and cool,
and there's back and forth,
and it's just always neat.
I like the garden leading up to the Sith boss fight quite a lot
just because of all the cool, unique NPCs
that come to wreck your shit,
including Man With Inferior Jump Attack.
Aw, there, there.
🔔
An idiot who forgot that arrows move in slow motion
in Dark Souls Land.
And oh, wow, Patrick Klepek's Demon's Souls character
is here, too.
And if you really like fighting characters
with similar abilities to you,
there's a cat who wants to help you protect the garden
from other real human players.
If you join their covenant and wear their ring,
occasionally you get summoned in as a blue phantom,
so you, yes, you can get backstabbed from ten feet away
and wonder if PvP will ever fucking work in these games.
In Bloodborne, stray hunters and hunter-sized bosses
have obscene amounts of health.
This puts you at a massive disadvantage
and does away with the feeling that you're fighting an equal
and instead fighting a boss version
that doesn't really play by the same rules as you.
Stop shooting me!
Oh, my God!
None of them can heal like you can,
which kind of balances it out,
but it doesn't feel right.
Actually, no, some of them do heal
and they get back a ton of health,
and it's kind of messed up.
I know it's possible to get in and make sure they don't,
and it's more challenging for them to have more health,
but it's not challenging in a way that's fun.
It feels off.
In my opinion, these fights would be better served
if they had an equivalent amount of health as you
but could get their health back from rallying like you
and would heal themselves in a pinch.
They'd be more interesting back and forth
like in the previous games,
and it wouldn't feel so much like a long, dull slog
every time you refight them,
getting them slowly back down to that last sliver
before they suddenly shoot you dead instantly again.
Great, now I have to come back and pick away at his health
and hope he doesn't insta-kill me again.
Bloodborne? More like blood...
snorn.
Gah.
You can fucking hit me out of my combo
while I'm hitting you.
That is a fucked up thing to put in a game.
That's fucked up, right?
Also, they have seemingly infinite ammo,
which is just rude.
Weirdly enough, invasions by other players
show off my version of this mechanic perfectly.
I got invaded exactly once in my first playthrough,
and it was exhilarating.
We both came close to dying multiple times
and made spaces to heal as we continued to fight.
Healing is super quick,
but the developers were smart enough
to make this parryable.
That's how I won in the end.
I kind of wish I'd been invaded more,
and that's not really something I say often
about the Souls series.
Maybe I'm just being a big whiny baby here,
or maybe that one invasion was so fun
it's forced me to wish there were more fights
like that in the game itself,
but I think an improvement I'd like to see
in a theoretical Bloodborne 2
would be more enemies that resemble
that kind of encounter.
I want the sense that the other hunters
got where they did by being exceptionally skilled
with the same assets as me,
not because they inexplicably had
many times more health and infinite ammo.
Oh.
But because of these dead...
Stop it!
But because of these dead...
Ha ha ha ha ha ha!
I also think the blood vial system,
while good and fun,
has the inherent downsides of if you run out,
you can't easily buy more
because they're just a bit too expensive per vial,
and if you're in an area or boss
that kills you a lot,
you're not going to be recovering them from enemies,
so you inevitably have to go farm vials
or the souls to buy them,
and that's just not great when it happens.
There's also some incredibly weird bits
where enemies aren't designed
for the areas you find them in,
like some of the bosses
or the giants in Cathedral Ward.
I'd like you to tell me
what even hit me there,
and why do you have to go back
to the central hub
every time you want to go somewhere?
That's kind of annoying.
These are all relatively small problems
in the grand scheme.
My main problem with the game
is also the best demonstration
of why the rest of Bloodborne is so good.
The chalice dungeons.
Oh my god!
They're a completely optional part of the game
where you can go into dungeons
and traverse them,
fighting more bosses and enemies,
and some of them are randomly generated,
meaning there is theoretically
infinite content in Bloodborne,
but I'm going to be honest,
they're really bad.
By stripping out the part
where the levels are carefully designed
to be fun and good and interesting
and challenge you in a fair and reactive way,
the dungeon segments can be teeth-grindingly bad
in ways that simply aren't fun.
Accidentally,
they're object lessons
in why we still have level designers
and don't just have a computer
churn out all our levels.
The chalice dungeons are so lazily put together
that this guy,
who spawns in, like,
all of the important rooms
in any given dungeon,
like, one of the bosses in the dungeons
is just three of him.
So on some floors,
you beat one of these guys,
hit the switch that unlocks the boss door,
and then you fight three more of him,
and you're like,
what?
You know, I've heard criticisms
that some enemies in the Souls series
start to get repetitive,
but honestly,
they don't even come close to this,
where you're literally just fighting the same guy
over and over in different permutations.
I'm not covering the chalice dungeons
in very much detail here
because I feel like I've talked about Bloodborne
enough at this point,
so it's not really going to hammer home
how just bad this is.
Like,
this room you're seeing right now,
you will see this room copied
over and over
for hours.
That is all the chalice dungeons are.
There are,
there are, like,
five, six different kinds of room
repeated
over and over.
Honestly, watch this part of the video
on a loop for, like,
two and a half hours,
and you will have a full replication
of about as much of the chalice dungeon
as I can stand to record
to make this video.
Even the pre-made dungeons
are just the same kind of rooms
in different configurations over and over.
It's not great.
You know what it reminded me of?
Kingsfield.
And no game should be like Kingsfield.
Oh, hey, look.
It's another one of those.
I'm so fucking surprised.
They also reveal how good
the rest of the game is
by showing how much care and attention
must have gone into making
all the areas and encounters
look and feel as good as they do.
And they do that by showing
how lacking the game would have been
if they hadn't been there.
Yharnam does the impossible
by feeling varied and huge and complex
while being primarily focused
on one big kind of similar-looking town
made of very similar kinds of architecture
throughout.
The chalice dungeons remind me
of the parts of dungeon crawlers
that don't hold up to scrutiny either.
They're almost literally just box rooms
with grimy stone textures
thrown up everywhere.
If Bloodborne were released as a roguelike
that used this randomly generated stuff
or if the whole game looked and felt
like the chalice dungeons,
I think I would hate it.
There's this game called Necropolis.
It's billed as a Dark Souls roguelike.
It's kind of boring.
The enemies are repetitive.
There's no boss fights.
Even quick attacks feel slow
like in Lords of the Fallen.
And more importantly,
the lack of design
in any of the levels or environments
means there's no character
or feel to the world.
It's the chalice dungeons
but without the upshot of being attached
to an actually good game.
I guess what I'm saying is
I like games when they're...
designed by people?
Weirdly enough,
while some of the new bosses
that only appear in the chalice dungeons
are repeated a lot across them
and clearly didn't have much time
or effort put into them
and don't strike me as particularly
interesting in and of themselves,
several of them are super fun
to actually fight once you get to them.
It's almost a shame
that the content you have to pass through
to get to them are kind of boring
or actively unfun
because they're worthy encounters.
I almost wonder if all the bosses
you encounter here
are the ones they made
and weren't happy with
so they didn't bother
putting them in the main game,
which naturally means
the best ones here
are the ones that feel the most
like they should have been after all.
Look at that!
There's a boss from earlier
in the regular dungeons
just walking around
and he's surrounded by two other bosses
from earlier in this dungeon
and they—they kill him for me!
What?!
The chalice dungeons
make a lot of points for me
about the importance of level design
and execution in these games
and show how the base mechanics alone
wouldn't be enough
for an engaging and fun experience.
You need the push and pull
of a designer hiding enemies
in just the right places,
scaling the difficulty of encounters
through careful development
of enemy placement and so on.
Oh, I fucking see you, mate.
Yeah, I've played—
I've played a video game before.
You're not weird, are you?
Welcome—
Welcome to Dark Souls!
That's the first trick
they pull in all those games.
Yep.
You got me the first time through.
This is a true Souls game.
Don't even bother
looking at what I picked up.
The real victory was—
Oh, Jesus!
I was feeling so full of myself then
and, like, another guy came.
Holy shit.
This game's amazing.
If you like walking from box room
to box room full
just of a bunch of random enemies
plopped in there
and, oh, look, it's another one of those,
then I guess
the chalice dungeons are for you.
If you like the chalice dungeons
and the randomness,
I can see an appeal to that,
but let's admit that
the actual game is more fun
and if that, for you,
is a contentious point,
then I'm sorry,
but you are beneath me.
Here's the part where I wrap up
and give some pithy comments
about how developers have things
to learn from Bloodborne,
but do they?
Not every game has to learn something
from Bloodborne.
Not every game is attempting
such a sharp, crackling,
deliberateness,
such a test of perception
and prediction over raw mechanical input
or simpler sorts of puzzle
or such a specific sense of uncertainty
and esoteric horror.
While many designers might well recognize
in Bloodborne a method
they could get across
their own intended reaction better,
a way of helping players
to get the best experience
from their work
by altering the attitude
with which they perceive it,
an equal, if not larger amount,
should strive to learn
absolutely nothing.
Gamers everywhere
have already had years of laughing
and attempts to commodify
their enjoyment of the Souls series.
The endless descriptions of new games
with,
it's like Dark Souls,
but with Y.
The sad truth is,
the most common reason
the Souls games didn't have Y
is because they would have been
the worst for it.
You know, I thought I wanted a roguelike
that was a bit like Dark Souls,
but then when I actually got it,
I realized there was a reason
why they didn't make one of those
in the first place.
More importantly is the wider critical
and cultural overreaction
to the series and its popularity.
While lots of folks
have always been super positive
about the series,
even since Demon's Souls,
its spiritual successor
becoming a genuine smash hit
with a huge swath of players
has caused lots of games writers
to kind of go into overdrive
about the series.
I can already predict one comment
someone paused this video
halfway through to leave.
Why did you bring up Thumper
right in the middle of this?
Thumper's a rhythm game.
What does it have to do
with bloody action, adventure,
RPG things like the Souls games?
Well, apart from the general point
I made about how games
can engross you,
you're right.
It doesn't really have much in common
with the Souls series.
The main reason I brought it up
was because when I was reading
reviews of Thumper
to see what people thought about it,
I found a review that called it
the Dark Souls of Rhythm Games.
I could say that calling something
the Dark Souls of something
or saying something is like Dark Souls
for the sake of comparison
and easy clicks
is just poor and cliche writing,
and it kind of is,
but it's more that we as critics
have a duty to communicate
why something is good.
Thumper has done a disservice
by being described
as the Dark Souls of Rhythm Games
because it indicates that we still
don't have the language
to really explain
why something is good
without having to compare it
to a singular experience
that isn't really all that much like it
when you really get down to it.
I remember Yahtzee's Dark Souls review.
In it, he makes this point.
So I'd ask them to explain
why it's good,
and they'd reply,
ooh, we can't tell you.
You just have to find out for yourself.
And then I'd say,
shut up or fuck off,
ideally both in either order.
He kind of skips over it for a joke,
but what he's doing here
is actually describing the problem.
We as a community
are sometimes unable
to really come up with
why we think something is good
or we enjoy it,
and it leaves us having to vaguely
gesture in a game's direction
because words have failed us.
It's a hard series to pin down,
I know, trust me.
I've just spent a really long time
trying to do so
because when we grapple
with why we enjoy something,
we're ultimately interrogating
our own feelings,
and that's a very difficult thing
to do indeed.
At least I assume that's why
my therapist charges so much.
But good criticism means good discourse.
I can completely see why writers,
critics, and journalists
use the shorthands they do,
but I think the onus is on us
to try not to,
to be willing to be long,
complicated,
willing to be, yeah,
even a little bit boring
or pedantic at times
in order to explore
the qualities of gaming experiences
in a truly valuable way,
which I hope I've done,
but knowing me, I probably, uh...
didn't.
For things to fully get judged
on their own merit,
we have to start examining
the actual merits
in concrete terms.
For the record,
the most accurate comparison I've seen
is when Patrick Klepek described
beating a Mario Maker level
as like the feeling of
beating a Dark Souls boss.
The point is the level achieved a feeling
rather than having any
pure mechanical similarity.
I mean, they're completely different genres.
It's hard to do that comparison right,
but Scoops managed it.
Hmm.
A hard thing to do
that only a few people achieve?
I guess that makes Patrick Klepek
the Dark Souls of Game Critic.
Bloodborne,
a game about injecting yourself
with increasing amounts
of dangerous liquid,
is itself the ultimate gateway drug.
The precise beauty
of the particulars of the experience
make for a fantastic thing
all on its own.
But perhaps more importantly
than being one of the best games
of its generation,
it inoculates its players
against the problems
the Souls series has previously
been unable to rid itself for years.
The previous games were really good,
but their design
accidentally necessitated
ways of playing it
that were conservative
and just not all that fun
to actually do.
It was, to coin yet another
unfitting food metaphor,
being handed a very good
bowl of soup,
shout-out to soup,
but being given a shield-shaped
pitchfork to eat it with.
It took a lot of time to realize
there were more funner ways
of doing it than it presented itself,
and by then,
people had lost their appetite.
Bloodborne is better soup,
but more importantly,
it's soup that comes with
a piece of paper that says,
hey, don't use the shield.
Just find a spoon or some bread
or just pour me directly
into your mouth.
Also, the bowl somehow
also contains a theoretical
infinite amount of bad soup
that tastes awful,
but it's cordoned off
from the good parts of the soup
and completely optional to consume.
Okay, I probably should have
written a conclusion out.
This isn't doing very good.
What ways do I expect the series
to be improved on in the future?
Well, I'm honestly daunted
by the genius
of the FromSoftware team,
so I really can't wait
to be surprised
by how they improve on it
in the future.
At the very least, though,
I do hope that Bloodborne 2
comes with complimentary breadsticks.
I can't end the video like that.
I can't.
I can't.
I'd like to say a very special thanks to...
Casey Schneibel
Kieran
Corwin Light-Williams
David Callan
David Rose
Ed Costigan
Eric Hunter
Findlay Bowick-Copley
Graf and Blackpaw
HeroRewar
Jack Harvey
Jack Ryan
Jan Anders
Jason Walter
Jay Logan
Jeffrey Ladd
Jeffrey Theobald
Joanne York
John Cantwell
Joseph Greco
That's right, I got it right this time.
Cavxile
Cav P
Kevin M. Knippy
Lady Naga
Layden Pierce
Luke Gould
Lizzie Edwards
Malarkey Bingo
Marco Shard
Matthew Z. Miliani
Mitchell Riedman
MrXenophobe
Neverminder
Niels Abildgaard
Olivia Mello
Peter Brodeson
Rebecca Washam
Renee S.
Renslayer
Robert Phillips
Samael
Scott Gairton
Sean Kemp
Sean Higgins
Siegfried Pinzer
Silas Pumpkins
Instant Grat
Spilt Coffee
Stefan Lindberg
Stephanie Aldrich
Thad Wasilewski
Thomas Johansson
Jenny Angel
Two Armed Blue and Red Drapes
Young Cowrie
Zachariah Taylor
Zachary Chan
Zemnmez
I.M. Turnip
Parker Anderson
And Rikami
While the rest of the credits going past, uh, in case you want to know,
yes, I am planning a Fallout 4 video,
but it's taking some time because I want to approach it with enough critical distance that
I give it a proper shot, you know? I want to take my time with it.
So I want to make at least one more long video in this style about something else first.
If you think about it, it took me eight years to make the Fallout 3 video,
and as of November 10th, Fallout 4 has only been out for one.
So give me a little bit, you know?
The best part about this video being over is I still haven't played Dark Souls 3
or the DLC for Bloodborne because I've been too busy making this video since, like, July?
This video was supposed to originally come out in October as, like, a Halloween special,
but I missed that.
So, like, I can finally play video games again.
People who back me get access to bonus videos,
and also I recorded, like, 24 hours of footage of me playing Bloodborne
with a friend that I'm going to put out there.
So there's that.
But also I shot a pretty elaborate sketch for this video that I decided to take out
because I realized it was just complete nonsense.
So that stuff's going to be going up soon.
I really want to put out a bunch of bonus videos.
I've been kind of putting off working on them to get this video out at all ever.
So I feel really bad about that.
So I'm going to put a whole bunch of those things out as soon as I can.
So bear with me.
Wow, you sat through all of those?
That's very nice of you.
If you backed me, I certainly hope I managed to get your name in there.
I always worry if I somehow miss names,
even though I literally just copy and paste it from a list.
If I've made a huge mistake, let me know.
But as a present for the nice folks who bothered to sit through the credits
of all the people who allowed me to keep making this stuff,
I'd like to just throw some game names out there.
Shadow of Mordor,
Deus Ex Human Revolution,
Vampire The Masquerade Bloodlines.
Feel free to write one of those names in a comment on this video
and see what it causes to happen.
