If you don't recognise him, this is Buddy Davis, a Golden Crocoduck nominee from 2011
who won the nomination for this extraordinary claim in his film The Creation Adventure
Team.
We found and brought back over 200 pounds of dinosaur bones here to be unfossilised.
What an adventure indeed.
The funky editing was done by the makers of his film, not me, but what Davis said is that
he recovered 200 pounds of what appear to be unfossilised dinosaur bones from Alaska.
The adventure he was referring to is recounted here, in a website that was something of an
early Christmas present for me.
Davis has often referred to this exciting adventure to the Liskin Bone Bed in Alaska,
but I was delighted to find a detailed account of the entire trip on a website including
the discovery of what Davis says appear to be unfossilised dinosaur bones.
Interestingly on the website, the bones transform from being what appear to be unfossilised
dinosaur bones to being unambiguously unfossilised dinosaur bones, Buddy, a musician and sculptor,
transforms into a creation scientist.
The Alaska Adventure is now a book, and I do hope Buddy makes this into a film.
It'll be a sort of Deliverance Meets the Keystone Cops, because from first to last
the expedition was dogged by mishaps and bad planning.
So much so that Buddy and his buddies had to constantly ask the Lord for help.
I'll let the journal speak for itself.
After a year of planning, our exploration of the Liskin Bone Bed on the north slope
of Alaska was finally right around the corner.
In this place were frozen, unfossilised dinosaur bones.
We paid $1,000 to rent three small rafts, life jackets and paddles.
Quickly we were off to the Colville River.
We loaded our rafts, said our goodbyes and began our journey.
Now how long into the trip do you think it'll be before Buddy sends out his first May Day?
Five days?
A week?
Fifteen hours?
Nope.
May Day, May Day.
Within fifteen minutes of our departure onto the Colville, Buddy and Dan's raft was out
of sight.
Without warning, Mike and George's raft suddenly began to sink.
It was certainly only because of God's help that they were able to get to the shore before
a certain catastrophe.
No, Buddy, God's trying to tell you that this ill-fated journey of yours is a complete farce.
If you can't even keep together and one of your canoes starts sinking within fifteen
minutes of your departure, then either God isn't looking after you very well or he's
trying to tell you to go home to Ohio.
On the second day, Buddy and his buddies didn't fare much better, getting separated once again
and they haven't even got to the bone beds yet.
So when do we get to see some dinosaur bones, guys?
Oh, Day Three.
They pull a bone out of the river.
Buddy reached out of the raft and hauled the eighty pound specimen into the boat.
The specimen Buddy hauled in turned out to be the jaw of a duck-billed dinosaur we have
temporarily identified as Lambiosaurus.
We were all praising the Lord that we had been allowed to find something so amazing.
How do they know it's Lambiosaurus?
Answer, they don't.
None of the guys on the expedition is a paleontologist, let alone an expert in identifying dinosaur
bones.
All we have to rely on is their keen eye and amateur knowledge, which don't seem all that
impressive.
All of a sudden, Buddy became very excited.
He had also found something in the mud.
It appeared as though we had found a long limb bone.
It was too good to be true, but it was digging out a piece of driftwood.
As I lie in bed, I hear various sounds, the mosquitoes outside, cliff rubble periodically
crashing into the river, gurgling muddy river rapids, and falcons nesting high above us
as they cry like baby kittens.
George is quietly singing praises to our mighty creator.
Thanks Lord for your perfect timing and giving us the privilege to do your work.
With our GPS and direct coordinates, we easily found the Liskin bone bed.
We found both fossilized and unfossilized bones.
It was the frozen unfossilized bones we were seeking for our research, although we collected
some fossilized bones as well.
Within two hours, we had plenty of bones for our project.
The Lord sure has been good.
He has provided everything we have found.
After collecting, we had a prayer of thanksgiving and praise for our wonderful creator.
The boats had taken on quite a bit of water because of the large waves.
Our duffels were soaked on outside and lying in the water in the bottoms of our boats.
By 9.30 pm, all of us were wet, tired, shivering and hungry.
We were exhausted and could go no further.
Then it happened.
I spotted two Eskimo speedboats heading downriver towards Nooksuk.
After offering them $50, they agreed to tow us the rest of the way to Nooksuk that night.
It was almost as if they were angels sent from God.
OK, reality check buddy.
What appear to be unfossilized dinosaur bones as you describe them, haven't been looked
at or analyzed by a single expert since you brought them back three years ago.
If this is such a stupendous find, why the secrecy?
Your exciting adventure started with a sinking canoe and ended with a rescue, and it wasn't
God who saved you, it was a couple of Inuit in a passing boat.
If they hadn't given you a tow back, you'd have wasted taxpayers' money asking to be
rescued by the local coastguard.
In short, the entire expedition was a disorganized waste of time that didn't result in a single
significant find.
Just a few bags of unidentified bones.
Whether they're dinosaurs or mammoths or moose, who knows?
But the expedition has achieved something.
It's given the rest of us a good laugh.
Thanks buddy.
Just full 6pm, we left Nooksuk on our bush plane flight back to Fairbanks.
As we viewed the winding river below, we had a flood of memories.
Nothing we had gone through to collect a few dinosaur bones seemed unreal now.
The bones must have something special in them.
Tears came to our eyes as we were reminded of the awesome God we served.
