This is a discussion I had with a YouTuber called Academic Agent a couple of weeks ago, at his invitation,
in response to my criticism of a video he had posted. Here's a taste of it.
...my continued scepticism about the methods used to prove man-made climate change.
As I said on Twitter,
one reason for my scepticism is because the people who are loudest about it
are also those who show themselves to be incredibly dishonest in practically every other walk of life.
The proposition, even from followers and subscribers of mine, seems to be,
yes, the Guardian are wrong about politics, economics, gender, race, statistics in general, science in general,
and basically all other issues, but you really should trust them about climate change.
Since our subsequent discussion is posted on his channel in its entirety,
I'm going to cut the basic introductions at the beginning and skip to the first question and my answer to it.
This will be just the first part, I hope to post the rest at a later date,
but you can go to his channel if you want to see the whole thing.
Let me see if I can open up my first question.
This is actually a question that was sent to me by James Delingpole,
who writes for The Spectator and Breitbart, among other things,
and he is, I think, fairly well known as a prominent climate change sceptic.
And he asked this question. He said, does he, as in, does Potola, even understand the sceptical position,
and if he does, what's his defence?
My basic answer to Delingpole would be, what is the critic's position?
Because the critic's position is different according to who you talk to.
I mean, for example, AA, you take the position, or at least you seem to agree with the position of Willy Soon,
since you reprinted his graph in your video, and I'm not sure if you knew it was his graph,
but it was a graph from his 2005 paper, showing that the sun is increasing in power.
There's more heat, more solar output.
Because the truth is that 2018, when you look at longer timeframes, is not that much of an outlier.
In fact, ice levels seem to rise and fall with the temperature of the sun. Funny, that, isn't it?
So question two is this. Why does arctic temperature, which is what all this recent fuss is about,
correlate pretty much one-to-one with sun temperature?
Now, that's his position. He's a critic, or what you would call a sceptic.
On the other hand, there are a lot of people like Anthony Watts, who runs What's Up With That,
who says, no, the sun is decreasing. So what is the position?
Some people say that CO2 has no effect on global temperature, some say it has a small effect on global temperature.
Some people, like John Coleman, say that CO2 is too small to be effective,
because it's only 0.03% and a teeny weeny amount.
And yet, someone like Christopher Monkton says that CO2 is plant food,
and it's absolutely essential for the planet and has a huge effect.
So there's no sceptic position. I've read something called the sceptics manual,
and I also saw Molyneux's video on the sceptics position in 12 minutes.
But that bears no relation to what a lot of sceptics out there are saying.
This is why I say they're critics rather than sceptics.
Just one thing. A lot of people in the chat are asking me to ask you to turn your camera off to improve your audio.
Oh, OK, sure. So I'll show you that Willy Soon thing, because I have that.
OK, this was on your video, and you were using this as an example, as Willy Soon did,
that Arctic temperatures are following solar output, or total solar irradiance.
You can actually see the scale on the left-hand side is in watts per square metre,
which is how TSI is standardly done.
But he shows it increasing over the last 40 years, very clearly.
You can see, if you look at the timescale at the bottom, the last 40 years shows an increase.
And yet, Anthony Watts, just about every other so-called sceptic or critic of climate science,
would say, no, that's wrong, it's been decreasing.
And in fact, it has been decreasing.
That's very clear, because they can take measurements from satellites of the output of the Sun directly,
and it shows a very clear increase.
Now, I'll give you another graph which shows that.
First of all, here's the PMOD graph from the Max Planck Institute.
I'll put that up on the screen. OK, there it is.
Now, this is the actual measurement of total solar irradiance.
This is a satellite which measures the output of the Sun.
So you can see quite clearly from that that it's going down.
Now, this is not controversial.
As I said, this is not just something that is a debate between scientists and critics.
I'm going to show you another graph here.
This is from Climate4U.
And Climate4U is not by any means a site that is sympathetic towards the conclusions of main scientists.
So I'll just bring that up for you.
And again, now this is measuring something different.
This is sunspot numbers. Sunspot numbers are very closely correlated with total solar irradiance.
So this is why they're often used to show the amount of solar activity and the amount of sunlight that we're getting.
Again, if you look back over the last 40 years since 1980, very, very obvious decline.
I could show you the one from What's Up With That, but believe me, it's going to show you exactly the same thing.
So here again, we have a problem in that Willy Soon is putting this information out.
It's been picked up by people all over the Internet.
And it's passed around blogs and all sorts of other things.
And people believe it.
Now, you put this on your website and you presumably thought that this was a legitimate and authentic piece of information.
But that's what I mean by tracking things down to the source.
If you actually check the source of the information, you can discover where that comes from.
And check the information to see if it's accurate. And it's not.
So this is why people know, scientists say that the sun is not responsible for recent warming,
because it's been decreasing at a time when global temperatures have been increasing.
Now, you said in the video that there's a one to one correlation, but clearly the correlation actually is negative.
In other words, if there is any correlation at all, it is that as the sun gets cooler, the Arctic gets warmer.
Now, that is obviously not the kind of correlation that makes any sense.
So I seem to remember that it wasn't a correlation between temperatures and the sun.
It was a correlation between CO2 levels and what the sun has been doing.
Let me just get it up again and I'll show you, because there were actually two graphs there.
You're looking at it now, right?
Yes, I can see it.
Now, I'm just going to have to look at a bigger one so that I can see the scale on it.
Now, the one on the left is Willy Soon's graph from his 2005 paper showing total solar irradiance against Arctic temperatures.
What he's showing there is Arctic temperatures going up since 1960.
And fair enough, that's probably what the temperature record shows.
I'm not sure. I think it was a record in Reykjavik he was taking or something.
But we do know that Arctic temperatures have been rising.
But alongside that or superimposed on that is a red line.
Now, that's in the left hand graph and the red line is showing total solar irradiance going up.
Now, when you talk about trickery and skullduggery in statistics, he is showing an increase in solar irradiance,
which is not there, in order to make it fit a temperature rise that is there.
Now, on the right hand side, the one you were referring to just now,
here we've got carbon dioxide in the red line and we've got Arctic temperatures in the grey in the background.
And again, it looks as though there is no correlation.
But I don't know exactly where he's got these figures from.
I hope he hasn't manipulated this to the extent that he manipulated the other one.
If we look at carbon dioxide levels in comparison to global temperatures,
because when we talk about global warming, we are talking about global warming.
There might be differences in Reykjavik that may not be impacted by carbon dioxide.
There might be some local thing there to do with temperature measurements that I don't know about.
I haven't looked into that graph. But what I'm saying is you can't take these things at face value.
Since we had that discussion, I've checked the right hand graph,
and I can't see any problem with the Reykjavik temperature data or the CO2 data used.
I think the problem was mine, I was probably misreading the timescale of the graph.
If you look at the period of warming since 1975, it in fact correlates very well with the steep rise in CO2,
whereas of course there is no correlation at all between warming Reykjavik and a cooling sun,
the complete opposite of what Willy Soon was claiming.
I also checked this against the world temperature vs CO2 graphs of the same time period, and it matches pretty well.
This graph is from the Stanford Solar Centre.
CO2 concentration is the blue line, which correlates well with the red line of global temperature,
except for the period from around 1941 to 1975 when we had heavy aerosol pollution.
The orange line, which is solar irradiance, only shows a correlation up to the late 1940s.
You have to look into it. The first time I saw Willy Soon's graph on your video,
yeah, I was impressed with it. I thought, wow, yeah, that does look as though it correlates.
But as soon as I saw that that was total solar irradiance, I thought, no, there's something fishy going on there,
because no one in the scientific community, even the measurements that are being taken directly of the sun,
show that there's any kind of an increase.
I do have one question here, which is that, and again, this is more from the economics point of view,
but one of the things that you're always taught to do when you're looking at things economically
is not to look for a single, it's seldom the case that there's a single cause for any given historical phenomena,
and then to be sceptical of people who look for single causes.
So could it not be, I mean, I'm just playing devil's advocate here a bit,
could it not be that both the sun and CO2 play a role here, and that it could be, you know,
some of one and half a dozen of the other? Why would it not be that?
Oh, okay, but the thing is, there are three main drivers of climate, and I'm talking about active drivers of climate.
It's actually a rather complicated thing once you get into the passive drivers,
but the active drivers of climate are the sun, carbon dioxide and aerosols.
And as a geologist, I mean, looking back over 500 million years,
these are the things that have basically set the global temperature.
And they're no different today than they were then.
And whenever people talk about, oh, humans are causing this, I say, no, humans are not causing it.
Humans have been on this planet for 150,000 years and we haven't disrupted the climate.
It's carbon dioxide. And once you understand it's not humans, it's carbon dioxide that does it,
then everything else falls into place because you can see the correlation throughout geological history.
So, yeah, the sun and carbon dioxide together are the influencers.
Now, in the short term, we're talking about decades and perhaps 100, 200 years, which may sound long term,
but there's actually, let's say, medium term because in geological time that's the blink of an eye.
The sun, since it has been declining in solar power, in solar output or TSI, total solar irradiance,
whatever measure you want to make of it, would actually have a cooling effect.
Now, I don't think anybody would deny it.
I hear a lot of critics, the so-called sceptics, who say it's the sun, stupid. The sun controls the climate.
Well, if the sun controls the climate, how come the climate hasn't been cooling for the last 40 years when solar activity has been going down?
In fact, the sun is having a downward impact on temperatures. It's called a forcing and it's like a tug of war.
It doesn't mean that the earth is getting cooler, but clearly it's not, unless you want to argue about that.
But clearly the earth is warming up.
But if the sun is getting cooler and trying to depress global temperatures, as it has been for the last 40 years, something else must be pushing them up.
Now, that's not the reason why they know it's CO2. I mean, this theory that CO2 affects global temperature has been around since 1896.
It's not new. It's not the least bit controversial in the scientific community.
So that's not the reason they know. But it just is so consistent with the theory.
And that's what scientists always look for, is consistency.
That if these are the three main drivers of climate, then there should be a consistency of when they are in this tug of war, one against the other.
That the temperature should be responding to that tug of war. And it is.
Now, when you talk about economics, I'm with you. Boy, there are so many different things.
I mean, I was laughing when Donald Trump couldn't understand why there was such good news in the United States and the stock market went down.
Well, I can explain to him why the stock market goes down when there's good news. And I'm sure that you can as well.
It's not rocket science. It's been going on for a long time.
And I'm heavily invested in the stock market.
So I do understand how economics works. Trying to get a handle on which stocks are going up and which stocks are going down.
How the economy is going to go is an incredibly difficult thing.
And I think you'd probably agree with this, partly because you're trying to read human emotions.
And to a certain extent, human emotions are predictable. The way that humans are going to behave is predictable.
But you've seen these experiments they do with bubbles where people know that a bubble is going to happen.
You know the experiments I'm talking about. Yeah. And they know the bubble is going to happen.
They're on computer screens and they're buying and they're buying and they're buying.
And even though they know that what they are buying on the computer is now the purchase price is far more than what it's worth.
And they know that the price is going to decline. They still create these bubbles.
We have an amazing capacity for doing things that are totally illogical.
But the wonderful thing about physics is, yes, you can have one thing that has such an effect.
And the Earth is a very simple system when you look at things like energy in, energy out.
Because energy and temperature are directly correlated and directly related in a very simple equation.
And I've seen economic equations that I can't get my head around.
I mean, some of these equations in economics, even if they work, are so complicated you need a computer in order to work them.
So I think you can't really compare the two. And I do get what you're saying about economics.
There are so many variables. It's such a chaotic thing. And climate is very similar to that.
It's very chaotic. But global temperature is not. Global temperature is actually fairly simple.
I did want to ask my second question on this, which is that if it's such a clear-cut thing,
why do you think that skepticism persists despite what you present as overwhelming evidence in your videos?
I mean, why is there still a debate about this?
Well, actually, in the scientific community, there's no debate at all.
There hasn't been really a debate about this since the 1970s or 80s.
And even before that, I mean, the whole point of the whole idea of CO2 changing temperatures has never been a controversial one.
It's always been accepted. And no one ever thought it was anything untoward.
You've got papers going back to the 1930s, 1950s, 1960s, all very clearly showing that carbon dioxide is a major driver of climate.
So that's not a controversial thing. The question is, why don't the general public accept this?
Why don't newspaper proprietors and television commentators and people who are not well versed in science,
why don't politicians and lobbyists accept it?
I do a lot of conversations with people because this is a very interesting question for me.
I'm always, you know, I don't like to argue a lot with the people who come on my channel and post.
Although, OK, sometimes I do. They get very irritating.
But I'm more interested in finding out why you don't accept this.
And then what happens is they give me a statement, which is clearly nonsense, which has come off the blogger's sphere, that they just I know where they got this stuff from.
They just read it. They believe it. They copy it and they paste it.
And to me, that's the opposite of being skeptical. That's why I don't call these critics skeptics.
But I then show them, actually, this information is wrong, just as I've just shown you with the Willy Soon graph.
And I'm showing you the actual measurements of the Sun show it's been decreasing instead of increasing.
Now, you would have thought that any rational human being seeing that and seeing the evidence and seeing the measurements
and even seeing other skeptics who agree with that, other critics who agree, would say, oh, you're right.
But they don't. They they double down on it and they insist that the whole they just change the subject or they run away.
They don't come back. It's very rare that I'll get someone saying, oh, thanks for explaining that to me.
Now I get it. I didn't realize I had been misled by this blog.
They still have this absolute faith that whatever blog they've attached themselves to must be telling them the truth.
They there's a kind of an echo chamber. And to be honest, I think this has happened since the rise of the Internet,
because I've been in this the science business for a long time and I've been reporting on climate change since the 1980s for new scientists and others.
And I don't remember this this kind of criticism of the scientific community in such a vehement fashion.
And it did happen to a certain extent with the ozone layer.
And I remember Paul Harvey criticizing it and Rush Limbaugh criticizing it.
But despite the fact they had an audience, there was no echo chamber as there is now.
People now seem to be very attached to the blogs that they are convinced.
I think a lot of that stuff could be easily be explained through what I'd call confirmation bias and heuristics.
You know, the Daniel Kahneman stuff, we can kind of can explain a lot of that.
But I mean, I do that there are still some questions that persist about this, because whenever I whenever I've asked people about this,
one of the answers I'll get back is, well, you know, it's a vested interest.
They have lobby, they are powerful lobby groups behind them.
But if you actually listen to Delingpole and Friends,
they all present themselves more as victims, as people who have been handed out and shut down and treated as pariahs,
and who have in many cases lost prestige or lost jobs or lost money as a result of it.
And yet they still persist. Whereas if you look at the incentives on the other side,
the people who push these things through their research, they get rewarded with grants, with government funding,
with, you know, in many cases these days they have big business behind them.
And one of the things that I thought about was, why does that happen?
And I do wonder if, let's just grant that everything that you're saying is absolutely, as in there's no debate about the science.
Can you still understand people who may be sceptical of the political ends being pushed?
Because one thing that does come with climate change is an agenda that says,
well, basically the only people who can sort this out are the government.
The solutions have to be pushed from the top down.
Sorry, there's too many things we're dealing with here. Let's deal with one.
I'm very familiar with these arguments, by the way, and they really astonish me.
I wanted to go back to the first one, and I should have been taking notes, and I can't remember now what the first.
But let's start with the grants. Now, having grants to do research is basically how scientists do things.
It doesn't matter whether you're an oceanographer or a climatologist or a geologist or a geophysicist or whatever field you're in.
The reason people get into research is because they are incredibly interested in learning how the world works.
Look, I've interviewed hundreds of researchers over the last 30, 40 years,
and one thing that they really share is a passion for finding out how things work.
And let's face it, that's not just a nerdy thing that interests them,
but if they want to get anywhere in life, if they want to win a Nobel Prize,
the way you do that in science is by showing something that nobody else has discovered.
You don't do it by repeating what everybody else has already done.
This is what makes me laugh when people say, oh, they're just sort of toeing the line.
What they're desperate to do is actually show something different.
And getting research grants does mean that you then get loads of money to live a fantastic lifestyle.
It's actually quite the opposite. The people that go in for research are normally the top of their class.
You don't go and get a PhD if you're stupid, and you work in the field of academia, so you know that.
These are the brightest and the best who normally get PhDs,
go on to universities to teach, and primarily to do the research.
That's why they take these positions.
What I'm referring to here is, I mean, some of the stories that you'll hear is that, I don't know,
somebody wants to do research on squirrels, OK?
I know what you're going to tell me, and they relate it to climate change, and therefore they can get their money.
Exactly.
OK. There's no surprise about the fact that as climate change becomes a more immediate problem,
more research is going to be done on it.
I'd like to know any field of science where that has not been the case.
When HIV-AIDS came into the fore in the 70s and 80s, there was a huge amount of research went into that,
not just in medical research, but in social sciences, a massive amount of research, because it was a problem.
When we had plate tectonics, now this is my field, when plate tectonics came up,
and I did my degree a long time ago, plate tectonics was still basically in the hypothesis stage back then.
Once people understood that earthquakes were caused by these moving plates, a huge amount of money was spent on research.
But this is done not to line the pockets of researchers.
This is done for a very good reason, because once you understand that earthquakes are caused by plate tectonics,
they're not just faults that for some random reason are moving that we can't understand.
We now understand the mechanism behind us.
Then we need to really investigate this.
And through all that research, we now have a much clearer understanding of where earthquakes will strike,
when they might strike and how big they might be.
And as a result of that, engineers can then either retrofit buildings
or the building code can be changed in order to make buildings more secure against earthquakes.
So, yeah, a huge amount of research goes in every time we identify a problem.
I'm not sure why that is a mystery or why that means that the research must be bad.
I think what people think is that because these guys, and by the way, squirrels and global warming,
I don't know if that's ever a thing, but it's possible, but it doesn't mean that you then fake your results
and you have to say that there's global warming by faking results.
That would be the end of a career.
So any scientist who has decided to go into the field of research,
instead of into the very lucrative field of lobbying for companies
or working for a corporation in doing commercial research,
they would have absolutely no interest in faking results
and even less interest in having that fakery discovered and being stripped of their careers and their reputations.
It does happen occasionally.
But the thing is, you know, just saying that as a matter of principle,
because they're getting grant money, they must be faking their results is a bit of a stretch.
I think I would like to see evidence of someone faking results rather than just insinuation.
I'm going to have to leave it there because this file is getting too big.
As I said, you can see the rest of the discussion on Academic Agents' channel,
and maybe I'll upload the rest when I have more time.
