Today I want to talk about a simple yet important element in narrative structure
known as planting and payoff. The most basic way to think of planting and payoff
is the idea of Chekhov's gun. In an 1889 letter Chekhov wrote one must never
place a loaded rifle on the stage if it isn't going to go off. Chekhov believed
that all narrative elements in a story should be both necessary and irreplaceable.
Well, I've only got four for big boy here so he's all but useless. Not all movies adhere to
this principle. Some just meander around and do whatever, but good ones do.
You've got two left! And I know that a lot of this is a matter of taste, but in a broader sense
audience satisfaction derives in part from the way that narrative elements are
introduced and paid off. Some plantings are obvious with an inferred, this is
going to pay off later, basically emblazoned into the sky, and others are
more subtle. But for a full satisfying narrative, generally when an element is
introduced, be it plot driven, thematic, or physical, it should pay off in some way
and also tie in to all the other narrative elements.
Whenever people, correctly, use the term deus ex machina, it isn't so much because
the salvation element is convenient, but because it had not been planted or set
up. You don't call Max's method for saving Furiosa at the end of Mad Max Fury
Road a deus ex machina because the means are so thoroughly planted throughout
the narrative, especially in the first act of the film, so that when the
vulvalini says, the audience immediately knows what the solution is because Max's
universal donor blood has been repeatedly established. The importance of
how narrative information is planted and paid off is best demonstrated when it is
done poorly or not at all. Just because an element is planted doesn't mean the
payoff, to put it diplomatically, is necessarily narratively satisfying.
Narrative elements can be introduced in a manner of ways. Dialogue is a common
one, but this is film, it is never as simple as just a line of dialogue
introducing an element. The framing, the color, the camera movement, the sound
design, all of these elements imbue meaning. So pacing matters, but so too
does order. To pick on Zack Snyder, again, because he is really bad at this
particular thing, the order in which you place your narrative elements matters.
For example, the idea that Clark should hide his alien self in Man of Steel.
The problem with introducing this conflict is that tension of will he or
won't he use his powers to help people has already been resolved. It's resolved
in the very first scene we see adult Clark. So we have the planting after the
payoff. The answer is given before the question. The DC Universe films, Man of
especially, rely way too heavily on what the audience already knows about Superman
from their basic experiences of living in the world, rather than setting up its
own internal narrative about this character. The trick with narrative is to
plant elements early and eventually pay them off in a way that doesn't feel
obvious or contrived. It needs to make sense and it needs to feel organic.
Information can be imparted through dialogue, but I'm more interested in
visual and sound information, so I wanted to do a brief overview of three
non-dialogue elements from Mad Max Fury Road. The silver spray, Max's blood, and
Max's boot. Your basic narrative planting and payoff will include a setup, a
reminder, and the payoff. Though depending on how closely together within the
narrative the planting and the payoff occurs, we may not need a reminder. Let's
look at the war boy spray. This nameless character is fatally wounded. The sound
drops out, the film slows down, all of the characters pay attention to this guy,
and it draws audience attention to the fact that this is important information
and you need to pay attention. First we get the visual element, the spray,
followed by a dialogue element, and then this. Information acquired. Silver mouth
spray signifies that a pseudo-religious suicide mission is about to take place,
the witness call and response imparting that to these guys, this is the most
badass thing ever, and also communal. They are judged on their performance. See
these guys are impressed. Slit, not so much. So the payoff for this comes not far down
the road. Nux is the only war boy left who can stop Furiosa after she runs this
vehicle into the hurricane. This further spurs him on, he wants to be like these
guys. So without having to say anything so on-the-nose as it's suicide bomb time,
when Nux starts doing this, we, like Max, immediately intuit his intentions. So what
I find remarkable about the way this culture is explained to the audience,
despite this world and culture being so removed and alien from our own, is that
we don't really need some fish-out-of-water character having the
details of the universe being explained to them. In fact all you see around you
has been taken from the lessons garnered from the historical documents.
Is this a spaceship? The audience gets a lot of information about this culture,
the universe, and how it works, but it's seen only through the eyes of people who
already live in it. They all know what the spray means. A clear planting of a
narrative element, followed by the payoff a few minutes later. But with the boot, a
bit more time passes between planting and payoff, therefore with this one we
need a reminder. An important but subtle theme in Mad Max Fury Road is that of
forgiveness when and if circumstance allows. And it is most explicitly shown
through the relationship of Max and Nux. Nux unquestioningly objectifies Max,
using him as an ornament and violating his body autonomy by stealing his blood.
This is not done out of malice, but simply because it doesn't occur to Nux
that this might be wrong. This shot is a turning point when they first look at
each other, and this is also the beginning of Nux's character arc. For one
hair of a second he sees Max as human. Then the setup thematically in the form
of the boot. Which brings us to narrative element slash metaphor number whatever.
Slit gets kicked off the car by Max. Slit steals Max's boot. The setup. When Max
finds Nux unconscious after they wrecked the car, Max steals Nux's boot.
The reminder. And then the payoff comes far later. Nux is learning to build
empathy, has decided to switch sides. The payoff. Max steals a boot from the
Bullet Farmer's gang, gifts it to Nux. A practical element. Now Nux has two shoes
again, that's nice. But also thematic. It shows that Max forgives Nux, and on a
deeper level that completion points towards Nux finding his own sense of
completion by joining Furiosa's ragtag band. A practical thread in the form of a
prop, sure, but like everything in this movie it has a deeper level than that. In
this case one of forgiveness. Max and Nux barely speak a word to each other
throughout the entire film, but in this simple gesture we get all that we need
to know. Max and Nux would have no concrete connection except for that boot.
Besides the boot, the only thing they have is Max's blood. And Max's blood is a
huge plot point, so I'm not going to go into all of the ways it is set up and
paid off. It establishes not only that this is effectively a culture comprised
of mostly the sick and the dying, but that Max is a universal donor. A setup that
pays off in a very big way at the end of the movie, when Max gives Furiosa a
direct blood transfusion. The blood tube is important here. First the setup, the
reminder, and finally the payoff. But there's another setup that's one of my
favorites in the film, because it's like a sub setup. And it uses not only visuals
to get across the information, and not only sound editing, but sound mixing as
well. Let's break that down. We're going to talk a little bit about sound mixing.
Max rises from the earth, like lava from a volcano, and first we get that
heartbeat sound. Normally that's a pretty big cliche in sound design, and they tell
you to avoid that, like on your first day as a film student. But since here it's
literally his own heartbeat he's hearing, we'll give it a pass. But it
isn't just that. Max's disorientation is intercut with shots of lava erupting, and
corresponding sound effects that come with it. These sounds are mixed using a
low-pass filter, a type of audio EQ filter that cuts off higher frequency
sounds. The easy way to remember it is that low frequencies pass on through,
therefore it's a low pass, and high frequencies are cut out. Cutting off
these frequencies gives almost the sensation of being underwater. Lower
frequency sounds are more tenacious at traveling through liquids and solids.
This is why bassy noises travel through walls better than piano music.
Any sounds that are coming from inside rather than outside are going to have
their higher frequencies cut off more, just by virtue of where the sound is
coming from and the mediums it has to move through. So Max's pain and
disorientation in this scene is shown by the higher frequency sounds in the scene
being cut out. And the tension is relieved when we reintroduce higher
frequencies back into the soundscape. The hiss of air escaping and the air tone of
the atmosphere. See I focus on the sound here because the framing doesn't really
get across the element that is being set up. That of an air bubble in Max's
body and the pain it's causing him. If you watch this scene with the sound off,
you can't really tell what's going on. It just kind of looks like the needle was
annoying him. But with the sound on, oh. Removing the needle releases the air
bubble. This may not seem like planted information, but it pays off at the very
end. Both with the needle and with the air accumulation in the body. It's almost
like the guy who wrote this was a former ER doctor or something. Max doesn't need
to explain what he's doing. We already know what he's doing because the
filmmakers trust the audience enough to intuit what's going on without having to
have it explained to them. The information has been planted and now
it's time to pay it off. The great thing about this movie is that you could go on
for hours about all the ways it uses its medium to maximize its potential.
Because ultimately, that's what this is all about. How to best tell a story using
your given medium. Mad Max Fury Road isn't perfect, but it's about as close
to perfect as a movie made by humans is going to get. I mean, I could go on. Hell,
I could go on about the sound design alone for another hour. But that's enough
for now. Thank you for watching. Like, share, subscribe, witness!
