If you've consumed any media in the last 70 years,
there's a good chance you've heard this voice.
This sound, man being eaten by alligator,
was recorded for distant drums in 1951
for a scene where a guy randomly drowns all by himself.
This recording then became part of the library
of sound effects people at Super Warnio Brothers used.
Another scream from that recording then appeared
in 1953's The Charge at Feather River
where a certain Private Wilhelm gets shot by an arrow.
They also use it, like, two more times in the same movie.
Sound designer Ben Burtt noticed this reuse
and started reusing it himself in student films
because he thought it was funny.
As a silly little joke, he hid it in the background
of a B-movie he was hired to work on.
Oops, looks like culture's been changed forever.
Burtt had accidentally started a career-long running joke.
-'Help me!'-
-'Help!'-
-'Help!'-
-'Help!'-
-'Help!'-
In his big cameo in Jedi, he does an impression
of the scream when he gets killed
by an OSHA-violating guardrail.
-'Help!'-
Then other people started using it too,
and now it's everywhere.
-'Help!'-
-'Help!'-
-'Help!'-
-'Help!'-
-'Help!'-
-'Help!'-
-'Help!'-
-'Help!'-
Getting in on someone else's in-joke
kind of risks ruining it,
but I wouldn't know anything about that.
-'Help!'-
And there's a bunch of other iconic screams like this.
-'Help!'-
-'Help!'-
-'Help!'-
-'Help!'-
-'Help!'-
-'Help!'-
Oh, Jesus Christ!
Like with Wilhelm, the source of these sounds
are usually well-documented.
That scream comes from a popular sound effects library,
and while we're ruining things,
those sheep-slash-goat-
screaming-like-a-human videos
you love so much?
-'Help!'-
Yeah, they're all fake.
That's just a sound that comes free with Apple software.
-'Help!'-
You're welcome, but for over a decade,
one sound's original source was unknown.
This one.
-'Help!'-
This is all over Internet video nowadays,
but where's it from?
Most people under a certain age
are yelling Roblox at the screen right now.
Roblox is a free online game-slash-platform
people can make additional content and games for,
and they can even monetize what they make
for, uh, uh, pittance.
According to YouTube journalist's
People Make Games,
Roblox developers receive less than 25%
of the money from sales of content they make.
This has led to the Roblox Corporation
attaining a net worth of roughly $7 quadspillion,
and one of, if not the, most iconic things
about this game is its death sound effect,
also known as the Roblox oof.
Videos of just this sound get millions
upon millions of views.
It has its own separate existence as a meme
across thousands of videos,
and one video claiming to be its origin
has 117 million views,
shockingly close to the lifetime views
of my entire channel.
This sound effect is a phenomenon,
but it's not from Roblox,
and this child is a liar.
Mmm.
Ah! Ah!
Now, I—
Ah!
I haven't played Roblox.
I play mature games for grownups,
like Fortnite.
Oh!
When I was the age Roblox would have
definitely controlled my life,
it was instead being controlled
by stop-motion animation
and then later by Garry's Mod,
a game which did not monetize its content
in increasingly horrifying ways,
transforming its community into a digital sweatshop,
but I'm sure the new way is fine too,
so no, I haven't played Roblox,
but I have played Messiah.
["Messiah"]
♪♪
Oh, for Christ's sake!
Oh!
Messiah was released in the year 2000
and developed by Shiny Entertainment.
They made Path of Neo,
so they're insane and I love them.
You play as a cute little cherub named Bob
who gets blasted down to Earth to help out.
This is the best opening cutscene ever.
Bob has no combat abilities whatsoever.
Instead, though, he can possess other people.
I'm a cop.
You know, in real life, a huge portion
of the angels who come to Earth
end up in the bodies of police officers.
It's true. Google 40% cops.
Bob can possess basically any living thing,
including rats when the developers
feel like making you save scum.
The player is constantly switching bodies
using their different abilities, credentials, and weapons.
The pacing is breakneck
because doing so doesn't slow you down.
I played Messiah in the mid-2000s
when I found it in a Christian charity shop.
I assume they didn't see the words
sex, religion, possession, death on the cover,
and then I threw it away.
I bought this copy on eBay to use as a prop.
I have to get this out for the rest of the video now.
Then a decade passes, and in a random YouTube video,
I hear a familiar sound.
Ooh! People tell me it's from Roblox,
but I swear I've heard it somewhere else.
Obviously, I immediately forgot about it
and moved on with my life until 2019
when someone else figured it out.
User PlasmaNode on Reddit
was watching the ending cinematic on YouTube
for some reason and noticed a very familiar sound.
Ah!
Boo!
Ah!
He posted his discovery on Reddit
along with a clip from the ending.
Someone stole and reposted his clip on Twitter.
A large Roblox YouTuber made a video about that tweet,
and then journalists started picking up on it,
although the articles do credit the wrong person
with the discovery because their one source
is a video that got it wrong.
Why did the sound get so popular anyway?
Well, if TV has taught me anything,
children being injured is just universally funny.
Let's not think about what that says about us.
Here's an interesting fact,
which I hope justifies me playing the entire game
in preparation for this video.
Everyone involved seems to think the sound effect
is specifically in the ending,
but it's actually all over the game.
You can fly around and flap your little wings to float,
and whenever you slam into a wall, Bob makes a noise,
and that's one of the noises.
It's also in the opening cutscene too.
Whoa!
It's kind of funny it was discovered in the ending,
the last possible place you would hear it
if you played the game.
Interestingly enough, there was proof in Roblox
the sound was from Messiah all along,
and no one thought to check.
You see, sound files have this thing in them
called metadata.
It's extra information that comes with a file.
You know, album art, list of the artists
and people who worked on it and so on.
You know those pirated Weird Al Yankovic albums
your friend gave you when you were 14?
Uh, that's why the album art was in there.
It was in the metadata.
I think that anecdote might be a bit too specific.
The oof sound in Roblox's game files,
ur.wav, has metadata in it saying it was made in 1999
while Messiah was being made
with the engineer listed as Joey Kouros.
Joey Kouros is an extremely prolific
video game sound designer.
He's worked on Tony Hawk's Pro Skater,
Spider-Man, Gears of War,
and even Fortnite.
That clip I showed earlier,
that wasn't just me showing off my sick skills.
That was a clever setup for this bit.
No, it wasn't actually. I wrote a Fortnite joke
and then it turned out he'd worked on Fortnite, but still.
And here's Joey on page XXXVI of Messiah's manual
as one of the sound effects guys.
See? Look? See?
I don't have a camera person this time,
so I'll have to cut to a close-up that I shot later.
Uh, Rachel stopped responding
when she found out what the video was about.
So there we go.
We know where the sound effect was from.
We even have a good idea who might have made it.
Mystery solved.
We can all go home to our families.
I'm just kidding. There's more.
That's only the beginning of the story, you worm.
I can't say that.
We haven't even talked about who owns the sound effect yet.
It doesn't belong to Joey.
It belongs to the company he was working for
when it was made, Tommy Tallarico Studios,
along with its owner, Tommy T...
I don't need to say his name.
He named his studio after himself.
Are you ready?
Yeah!
Ooh!
Tommy Tallarico is a veritable video game industry icon
according to the first line of his biography on his website.
I wouldn't personally go that far,
but he was a fairly well-known musician and composer
for video games in the 90s and 2000s.
His most notable soundtracks include
Earthworm Jim, MDK, and Advent Rising.
His company was involved with the sound effects
on lots of other games from this period too.
That's why if you're my age or older,
this is burned into your brain.
Tommy Tallarico Studios.
He was also on TV on the show's electric playground
and Judgment Day,
some of the earliest shows about video games,
reviewing new releases and interviewing developers.
If you were around for a certain era of game history,
you remember Tommy from TV
or played something his company worked on.
He also co-founded Video Games Live
which produced symphony performances
of popular video game soundtracks.
VGL is universally recognized among gamers
as a thing they think they remember hearing about
that seems nice.
Through royalties from his company's work
over the years,
Tommy's doing pretty well for himself
and he's spent his money on living
in a very interesting house.
It has themed rooms, a Spider-Man room
full of all the original comics.
Probably have about $50,000
in your hands right there.
Giant statues of Lara Croft
and the Fifth Element Lady,
an ancient Egypt-themed dining room.
The list goes on.
The first thing I built in my house
when I bought this was a seven-foot waterfall,
but it kind of sucks because at night sometimes
I have to go to the bathroom.
Tommy is proud of his insane mansion.
That's why I've got so much footage of it.
He's given numerous tours of the place over the years
and it was even on MTV's Cribs.
He's so proud of that he re-uploaded it
to his own YouTube channel years later.
He's very happy about the fact
he was specifically on MTV's Cribs.
He says it a lot in interviews
and that's what he calls the video
he uploaded onto his own channel
and there's no way he would tell an obvious lie like that.
Would he?
Foreshadowing is a literary device
in which he also re-uploaded an old UK show
where the presenter clearly hates his house.
This is absolutely hideous.
You've got to sort yourself out, Tommy.
You've got too much money.
This is silly.
It's not right, Tommy.
No, but it is.
There's children starving.
And if you're the sort of person who's impressed
by Guinness World Records,
Tommy has a huge stack of them
leaning up against a cabinet
in the corner of his awards slash Indiana Jones nook.
The big one is person who has worked
on the most video games in their lifetime.
I actually have the Guinness World Record
for the person who's worked on the most video games
in their lifetime.
He's such a big deal he was handpicked
by Shigeru Miyamoto to work on Metroid Prime.
Metroid Prime with Shigeru Miyamoto.
I worked with him for, uh, many years.
And he was also the first American
to work on the Sonic the Hedgehog franchise.
I was the first American ever hired, uh,
to work on the Sonic franchise.
Can you believe that?
Can you believe that?
Do you really believe that?
Tommy's been kind of resting on his laurels
doing video games live for a while now.
He hasn't done much new music for games
since the late 2000s.
One of the last things he did was donate music
to Super Tofu Boy, a game made by PETA.
It's a really bad Super Meat Boy clone
interspersed with quite good music
and interesting meat facts.
Listen, PETA, I've eaten a lot of tofu,
but meat doesn't scream either.
If it did, people would probably stop eating it.
Tommy is a vocal PETA supporter,
doing an interview for them in the Egyptian wing
of his house about cruelty to animals
and put out a statement on Facebook
responding to criticism of his involvement with Tofu Boy.
It's the only press release I've ever read
that has emoticons in it.
We can't really talk about Tommy
without talking about what he was doing
while the OOF was being discovered.
Tommy is most well-known nowadays
for what has become known as the Amico disaster.
In 2018, Tommy acquired the rights to Intellivision,
a game company from the 70s and 80s,
and announced he was making a brand new console,
the Intellivision Amico.
Amico aimed to be a truly family-friendly games console
with low age ratings on its games
and the bonus selling point of, uh,
not having online play.
Apparently to get people playing in the same room together?
Together again. Aw.
Some people would tell you online play
is one of the best features of modern gaming
and a nice option for people who can't easily
be physically next to each other,
and to that, Tommy's reply was no.
When I was growing up in the 70s, 80s,
and even when I was working in the game industries
in the 90s, you know, we didn't have the Internet, right?
With this pitch in hand, how did the Amico do?
It didn't.
It was delayed, supposedly due to the global pandemic,
but then it was delayed many more times,
and it still isn't out two years after the intended launch.
It seems less like unfortunate supply chain issues
and more like management underestimated
how hard it is to make a new game console from scratch.
As CEO, Tommy made the decision
to open two company offices in Irvine, California,
and Salt Lake City, Utah,
two really expensive places to open offices
in the middle of the pandemic.
In his video tours, the large, expensive spaces
are mostly empty and unused,
with the money guy in the back looking like
he's working overtime trying to keep this operation afloat
without a finished product.
This is where the magic happens.
Tommy wants money.
This is, this is, and this box is where it all happens.
As the money started to run out,
they turned to crowdfunding investment website Fig.
Tommy produced a video in his Spider-Man room
with other company leadership in his Egypt room
and Tomb Raider-themed movie theater room
claiming the console just needs a bit more money
to get going and release is just around the corner.
The rocket ship has been built.
We are on the launch pad,
and we just need the fuel to take off,
so strap yourself in because it's gonna be
one hell of a ride.
They raised $7 million more
and the Amico still didn't come out,
so they tried again,
turning to second crowdfunding investment website Republic.
They even used the same pitch video.
Come on, guys, the rocket ship just needs
a couple more million dollars.
Strap yourself in.
They raised over $11.5 million more
so they could continue to not release a console.
They tried a third time on a weird,
shady investor website that pretends to be a livestream
but is clearly prerecorded.
The rocket ship is built, folks.
We are on the launch pad.
We just need a little more fuel.
And then they turned to yet another
crowdfunding website for more
and canceled it partway through when it became clear
there's no one left to invest.
When internal documents leaked
revealing the console's internal hardware
was cheap, old, and rubbish,
Tommy threatened people who reported on it
with legal action, and when another journalist
asked what the reporters had done wrong
reporting publicly available information,
he deleted all the tweets.
The Amico's difficult non-launch,
fearful tossing of investor money
into two large holes...
There's not too many people here in the office yet.
...and its CEO's increasingly aggressive behavior
towards people trying to report what was happening
netted the company and Tommy some criticisms.
Tommy did the responsible thing
and started messaging people to call them names.
He defended the Amico on internet forums
calling detractors morons, idiots,
mentally unstable, narcissists, and cowards,
comparing criticism of his business decisions
to racism, eventually settling
on calling his detractors gaming racists,
the funniest term I've ever heard.
But these elitists, they're racists.
They're literally gaming racists.
He did this while following a bunch of actual racists,
white supremacists, and far-right personalities
on Twitter. This caused people to check
for his other hot takes and discover his opinion
on people who kneel for the national anthem.
Apparently racism is bad,
but protesting it is for douchebags.
Somebody just said I sound like a social justice warrior.
Uh, you couldn't be farther from the truth,
and I'm the most un-politically correct person
on the planet.
Don't call me an SJW.
You have no idea how racist I am.
People are saying I got triggered.
No, I'm just having fun and being passionate.
The folks in there that are, that are,
that are peeing their pants right now.
Things just got worse from there.
It hit the point where Tommy,
the CEO of a family-friendly games console company
in desperate need of investment,
would only give interviews with an ever-dwindling group
of diehard fans who completely agreed with this behavior.
The kind of normal person who wear a serial killer mask
while they interview you.
My wife told me to cancel my amigo,
and I still did not.
This is one of the last people
Tommy was willing to speak to.
And then if you want to hear me, um, uh,
pwn some noobs and, um, and, and punch back
at some haters, follow me on Twitter,
TommyTellerico, and, uh, you know,
I don't mind punching back to some of these losers.
He has since stepped down as CEO
with his replacement announcing the company
is entering a quiet period,
which is a hell of a subtweet if I've ever seen one.
The amigo still isn't out,
and a lot of people want their money back.
In the middle of all this,
right before the first big delay,
before things got super bad,
back when Tommy had a reputation to burn,
the oof discovery was made.
Due to his contract with Shiny Entertainment,
TommyTellerico Studios owns all the sound effects
he and his employees made for the game.
Shiny could use them in Messiah,
but they belong to Tommy,
and he can use them again or sell them if he wishes.
And when Tommy found out a sound effect he owned
was being used in Roblox,
oh, boy, did the butter begin to churn.
Tommy stepped up to the plate
and did a stream on YouTube called
Talking About the Roblox Oof Sound and Controversy.
It's hard going back to this stream
because he spends a good chunk of it
pitching a soon-to-be-released game console
that still doesn't exist.
We're actually coming out with a brand-new video game machine.
It's called the Intellivision Amico.
We actually don't allow online play.
It's weirdly anxiety-inducing
watching a man in January 2020,
right before a global pandemic,
pitching a console whose central feature
is trapping people in a room together.
Everybody can kind of come together
and play in the same room together.
But when he wasn't pitching
his scam-adjacent business venture,
Tommy was demanding Roblox give him $100 million.
Tommy wants money.
Okay, for legal reasons, I'd like to specify
that was a joke. He didn't ask for that much.
Probably.
He didn't say how much he wanted.
Almost like he was embarrassed to.
Tommy made it clear he didn't want Roblox
to remove the sound.
He wanted them to keep using it but to pay him for it,
and if they didn't, things were going to court.
They may think that, you know,
I'm trying to get the sound taken out of the game.
I'm not.
They may think that I'm currently suing Roblox.
I'm not currently.
But it's also not fair to me
that I don't get compensated for this.
This situation is, legally speaking, very funny.
Allow me to pretend I understand it for a few minutes.
A key point here is, at least as far as I can tell,
so probably wrong,
Tommy isn't owed any compensation.
According to Roblox, the oeuvre came on a CD
of sound effects the original creators purchased
when they were making the game in the mid-2000s.
If this is true, they used the sound
with the reasonable belief they had the right
to do so at the time.
Whoever took the sound out of Messiah
and sold it on a CD could be in trouble,
but the two guys who started Roblox in 2006
didn't do anything wrong apart from create Roblox.
Okay, I've spoken to a couple of lawyers
after filming this bit.
Should have done beforehand, really,
and they clarified something I think I should add here
about them not doing anything wrong.
They did still technically do copyright infringement.
If you use a sound effect you bought from someone
and it turns out they stole it and lied to you,
you're still guilty of copyright infringement.
However, if this actually went to court,
there is something called the innocent infringer defense.
If an infringer can demonstrate they had no reason
to believe they had committed copyright infringement
and it looks like Roblox might be able to do that,
the court can reduce the statutory damages
to as low as $200 per infringement.
There are other types of damages like actual damages,
the losses suffered by the owner
as a result of the infringement,
but that's something that could only be answered
in a courtroom.
As you're about to see, however,
Roblox directly told Tommy
they don't think they owe him anything,
so it sounds like they think they have a good defense
if things go to court.
In these tweets a few days before the stream,
Tommy seems a bit annoyed that no one owes him money,
although in his version, Roblox feel like
they don't owe him anything,
which is a strange way of describing a large corporation.
I think what Tommy means is Roblox's lawyers
know what the law is,
but he still would like to have some money.
All Roblox are required to do in this situation
is remove the sound,
and Tommy could send a cease and desist
and trigger that happening whenever he wanted.
I could have sent a letter very easy.
Cease and desist. Stop using the sound.
It's mine. You don't have permission to use it.
Take it out of your game.
But Tommy isn't doing that
because he doesn't want it taken out.
Tommy wants money.
If he can get them to keep it in
and pay him a license fee to use it
or just buy the sound off him outright,
he could make a lot of money.
I'd rather them just, uh, pay me
and them own the sound forever
so that it stays in the game.
Tommy cannot stress enough
how much he doesn't want Roblox to remove the sound
because that's how he makes money from this.
Uh, I never asked Roblox to remove the sound.
I don't want it to be removed.
I haven't told them to take the sound out of the game.
I want to keep the sound in the game, so...
And Roblox probably want to keep
the immensely popular sound in their game.
However, they are a business.
Their ultimate goal is to keep
as much of their money as possible.
A majority of Roblox's income
comes from underpaying the people
who actually make the game's content.
How much do you think they're willing to pay
for .3 seconds of a child saying ow,
especially when they could replace it for free?
Uh, Roblox could remove the sound tomorrow
if they wanted to.
So when Tommy approached them asking for money,
Roblox offered him less.
We approached Roblox.
We said, hey, there's a situation,
and we're gonna ask for this much.
Roblox said, eh,
we think you should get this much.
So, so, you know, this much is what we think.
Just to put it in plain English,
the purpose of this stream is for Tommy
to complain that Roblox will not offer him
enough money to buy a sound effect they don't need.
I think they're, they're nuts and disrespectful to me.
This is an all-time classic Tallarico moment right here.
Complaining about respect while calling someone nuts
and asking them for more money.
It's just incredible.
I'm hoping that we can come together,
I don't know, maybe somewhere in the middle,
uh, to make everyone happy.
One question really starts to stand out
in this 90-minute stream.
How much money does he want?
He's very careful to never say how much he thinks
the sound effect is worth, how much he asked for,
or how much they offered him.
And I can't tell you, people are gonna say,
well, how much did you ask for?
Look, you have to understand
that it is not professional of me
to go around stating how much money I'm asking
and how much they are offering.
Just to be clear, unless there's some kind
of non-disclosure agreement,
which he probably would have said if there was,
there isn't anything actually stopping Tommy
from saying how much he wants for the sound effect.
The Amico saga has proven irrefutably
that Tommy does not care in the slightest
about appearing professional.
That excuse doesn't work.
He's choosing not to say it
and getting increasingly defensive
as viewers keep asking and he runs out of explanations.
To be honest, none of your damn business.
No, no.
How much did you say for them to pay for the oof sound?
Okay, well, I've already gone over that,
that I can't talk about that.
To an outside observer and the chat
whose questions he was dodging,
it started to feel like Tommy just wanted
a embarrassingly large amount of money
for a single sound effect
and knew that it would make him look
really greedy if he said it.
People are never gonna know, you know, what it is
and there doesn't need to be that knowledge.
He's in the fascinatingly awkward position
of not being able to say how much he wants
even though that's what the stream is about.
It would be unprofessional to talk about that,
um, but I think I did describe that it's,
um, a lot more than what, you know,
they were offering which was barely anything at all.
I think it's worth asking how much barely anything is
to a millionaire with a dedicated Spider-Man room
and an indoor waterfall in his mansion.
Everyone should have a seven-foot waterfall,
I think, installed in your room,
but the thing that's kind of bad about it
is that at night,
I always have to go to the bathroom.
Wait a minute. Didn't he already make that joke?
Later in the stream, he started taking questions
and someone asked him to give the ratio
how different the counteroffer was.
Tommy, percentage-wise, how far is Roblox offer
compared to what you ask for?
At least 100 times...
less.
So that, you know, if they offered me $1,
I'm asking for $100.
So, you know, if they offered me $1,000,
that means I'm asking for $100,000, right?
So that's how far it is off.
I find it very curious that he will say
how much he asked for,
but only in the form of a riddle.
Even more curiously, he uses very small amounts
of money as examples.
He chooses not to say, for example,
if they offered me $50,000,
that means I asked for $5,000,000,
or if they offered me $100,000, okay,
I can see why he didn't.
And I hope they come to their senses.
And I know they're probably watching.
I don't know. Maybe they're not.
It's Saturday morning.
So that was the situation in January 2020.
Roblox were offering to buy the sound.
Tommy wanted 100 times more money
than they were offering,
and if things didn't go his way,
he was threatening to take things to court.
You know, I have attorneys that I have teams of attorneys.
I usually have about 20 different lawyers.
It's just a difference of opinion
on whether or not I helped to bring millions of people
to their game or not and what that is worth.
That last thing is, I think,
why Tommy thinks he can ask
for whatever massive amount of money he won't say.
In his mind, this one sound effect
single-handedly launched the Roblox franchise.
But the idea is that this is a sound
that helped to create the franchise, right?
Some may say even that the reason Roblox
is as popular as it is now
may be because of the fact
that so many people share this oof sound.
So, some may say,
Tommy, you don't need to launder your arguments like that.
You are the one saying that right now.
This is something that helped
to create the franchise itself.
It's made the game Roblox go supersonic.
It was part of the reason.
How many millions of people found out
about the game Roblox because of a meme
that used because of the sound, right?
We think we're asking for something extremely fair
considering what it has done for the franchise.
These claims are hilarious, exaggerated,
but most of all, wrong.
Take the sound effects from Minecraft
that are really popular and people use a lot in videos too.
They have a huge presence online as well,
but they didn't make Minecraft popular.
They're popular because they're in a game
millions of children have played.
The Roblox oof took off in mid-2017
when Roblox was already a pretty mainstream thing.
The cause and effect is completely backwards here.
While it might not be entirely impossible
for a single sound effect to make a game very popular,
I would like to remind everyone
that this sound effect was already in a game,
and that game was such a massive critical
and commercial failure that no one noticed
the sound effect had been stolen for 20 fucking years.
Come on, bud.
Roblox didn't become a multi-billion dollar company
because of a sound effect.
They got there by being evil.
Speaking of evil, Roblox eventually worked with Tommy
to turn all of this into a whole new way
of monetizing their empire of nightmares.
Instead of paying Tommy for the sound,
they're making the players pay for it.
In November 2020, Roblox announced
the oof sound was going to be removed,
but they were updating their developer marketplace
so players could purchase sounds to use in their games,
and once this update was complete,
the oof sound could be purchased and used through there.
I assume Tommy would get a cut from this.
Simultaneously, Tommy announced he had produced
a sound effects pack for creators
to use in their Roblox games, including the oof.
I have done a brand new sound design library
just for Roblox.
Creators could buy a range of sound effects packs
costing from $10 to $250
and use these in the games they make.
Roblox and Tommy agreed to keep the sound in the game
as is for a while so the sound marketplace
had time to get up and running
and no one had to go oof-less in the meantime.
But this functionality still hasn't been added
a year and a half later.
Eventually, in July this year,
Roblox, citing a licensing issue,
removed the sound and replaced it with this one.
Gah! Which is rubbish, frankly,
but it might be bad on purpose to incentivize paying
to replace it once they get the marketplace up.
So clever move, I guess.
You bags of scum!
Tommy also got to make some official oof merch,
so that was nice for him, I suppose.
I've created an oof T-shirt.
It doesn't look like he got the massive payday he wanted,
especially since the audio marketplace
hasn't manifested yet,
but at least he got something out of it.
So there we go.
Wasn't that an interesting story?
That's the end of the video essay.
Don't look at the run time.
Don't worry about it. Don't worry about it.
If you came here to find the origins of a sound effect,
you can go.
Subscribe on the way out if you'd like,
but take care.
Go play Roblox or something.
And, uh, Tommy, I know you're watching.
I've seen you arguing with people in the comments
of videos with 100 views.
You can go as well.
Go do whatever it is you do in your fun house.
I'm just chilling out.
See ya.
♪
Okay, I think they're gone.
♪
This video is being filmed at an undisclosed location
to avoid being traced.
Also, Mom went on holiday and she locked the garage
so I can't get to my set.
And no, I have no idea why the back wall
of this room is also green.
The last guy who lived here had terrible taste.
Anyway, I think he's gone.
Okay, we need to talk about Tommy.
This is where the video was supposed to finish.
So I was writing up the script and doing a bit more research,
and then I re-watched Tommy's E3 2021 pitch
for the Amico, and I realized something.
He takes credit for creating the oomph
in a very particular way.
I'm even the guy who did the oomph sound for Roblox.
He made the sound for Roblox?
I thought I misheard him or maybe he misspoke,
but no, that's how he says it.
The thing that you might know me the most from
is the guy who created
the beloved oomph sound for Roblox.
That's right.
The sound wasn't made for Roblox.
It was made for another game and reused by mistake.
That's what this whole thing was about, Tommy.
He said that one in the commercial
for his sound design kits he's selling
to put it back in the game.
Why is he saying it like that?
Well, obviously the idea he made it for Roblox,
this massive, important corporation,
is slightly more prestigious than the truth, isn't it?
So he's slightly altering the story
to give himself a bit more credit,
and that's fine. Like, whatever. Who cares?
But then I thought, you know,
for a sound with another guy's name on it,
he seems pretty happy to say he personally made it
for Roblox.
From an outsider's perspective,
it looks a bit like Tommy is taking credit
for something someone who worked for him did
decades later.
And yeah, sure, my script was almost done,
but I couldn't let that possibility sit unexplored.
So I tried to figure out who actually made the sound,
and what I discovered was...
interesting.
And then a bunch more other shit happened,
and now the video is this long.
I'm so sorry.
♪
Yes, Joey's name is on the file,
but that doesn't necessarily mean he created it.
If he did the final exporting of the sounds
Tallarico Studios made for Messiah,
his audio program would put his name on them
regardless of who recorded, edited, or mastered them.
Instead, let's look at how Tommy talks about who made it.
Let's rewind the clock a little.
Back in 2019, Tommy quote-tweeted that one video
that was a repost of the thing PlasmaNode put on Reddit.
He indicates that his company created
and owns the sounds used for Messiah
and that the sound effects was created
by my lead sound designer Joey Kouros.
Notice that he specifically doesn't say that he made it.
He says his company created and owns it
and then specifically credits Joey,
implying little to no direct personal involvement.
I believe this version of Tommy's story is true.
However, soon after writing this,
to put it bluntly, it looks like Tommy realized
how popular the sound was.
He's said in many places, including the livestream,
that he didn't really know that much about Roblox
until he found out one of his sounds was in it.
So on a timeline, it looks like he wrote that tweet
and then started looking at the sound's presence online.
In his next tweet, he says he's surprised
to discover the sound has tens of millions of views online
and then all of a sudden it's a sound we created
and then, and he adds this in parenthesis
like he's trying to sneak it into the story
at the last minute,
and I myself recorded.
This is a bit of a change, isn't it?
It's also just a weird way of talking
about something you created.
Like, if you found out something you had made,
you, was in a huge game, you would go,
hey, I made that.
You wouldn't go, as you can see,
my company created and owns that.
It was made by someone who worked for me decades ago.
Oh, wait, the sound's really popular.
I mean, we made it and I myself recorded it.
And to his credit,
I think Tommy noticed how this sounds too
because 30 minutes later, he tried again.
He started a second thread where this time
it's a sound he created, Joey edited, and he owns.
Note that he specifically used the word created again.
So he got his story straight in the end at least.
Good for him.
But that does mean this first tweet
is a bit embarrassing, isn't it?
Now, you tell me,
what one thing would make Tommy look more like
he was trying to rewrite the history after the fact here?
Deleting the tweet, right?
From my perspective,
that would be a very stupid thing to do.
But I must be missing something because he did delete it.
It's gone.
I am not accusing famous industry veteran
Tommy Tallarico of lying about who made a sound here.
I don't know for sure who did what on this sound.
But Tommy should.
And if he's telling the truth,
why did the truth change
when he was surprised by how popular the sound was?
In a very short span of time,
Tommy's version of history went from
Joey created it to we created it
to I created it,
and then later an attempt to delete the fact
he said Joey created it.
I know how it sounds.
It would be weird to assume someone just wants to brag
about making this one sound effect this badly.
But he does brag about it.
He put it in his Twitter handle.
It's part of his pitch for the Amico.
It seems very important to Tommy
that he doesn't just own the sound,
that he personally created it.
To most people younger than me,
that sound effect could be the most well-known thing
on his resume, which is a bit depressing, really.
And when he tries to describe the process
of creating the sound, things get even weirder.
In the OOF livestream,
Tommy's happy to say he made the sound,
but then he tries to go into detail about how it was made.
I thought what first I would do
is talk about how the OOF sound was created.
When he talks about the work
that went into making the sound,
he doesn't say he did anything.
He says we.
Then what we did is we went through,
you know, all the different lines.
We did a whole bunch of other stuff to it as well.
So after we pitch shifted it down and then...
Sometimes he accidentally says I and then corrects himself.
I wanted to let folks know how I created the sound,
how we created the sound,
myself and my sound designer Joey Kuras.
It just keeps going like this.
We start to tweak the sound, each individual sound.
So again, in OOF, we might have spent, you know,
a half hour trying to figure out exactly
which way we should have pitched it down
and what thing we would have taken and this and that.
OOF!
This is a strange way to describe something you did.
Far from being a sound he created and Joey merely edited,
whenever he has to describe any specifics,
all of a sudden it was done by committee.
Tommy isn't lying about who did what here.
Quite the opposite, really.
He's specifically avoiding lying
by being as vague as possible about something
it would be easy to talk about
if he actually made the sound himself.
So I took this little girl's, uh,
we took the clip, right,
and then what we did is we edited it
and we kept the length of the sound.
He struggles to come up with anything he actually did.
Like, his knowledge helped?
And, um, we'll say, uh...
I want to say this right.
I mean, it took a lot of my knowledge of audio
to create this sound and make it sound unique.
Now that people know about me,
they know about how I created the Roblox sound.
After seeing a guy specifically avoid saying I
and say we dozens of times
and then finish the story by saying,
so that's how I made the sound,
it just comes off really disingenuous.
One quick indicator of what he could mean by we is
at one point he uses it to describe the act
of exporting the sound out of the program.
You know, compressing it and making it all,
EQing it and doing all these crazy things to it.
Uh, before we ended up saving it out, so...
When he says we here, he just means Joey.
It only takes one person to hit save on a file,
and that's the one thing we know for sure Joey did.
Like with the money situation,
it's hard not to read into why Tommy is talking strangely.
It starts to sound like Joey did most of the work,
but then that would mean someone else
deserves the credit for creating the sound,
so all of a sudden this .3 second sound effect
becomes a team effort.
That's Tommy's version of how the sound was made.
He says we, but sometimes when he says we,
he just means Joey, so what's Joey's version?
Joey's been pretty quiet about all this,
and good for him.
His career's still going strong,
unlike some people's,
and I'm sure he has better things to do
than litigate who made an ancient sound effect,
unlike me who apparently has plenty of time for that shit.
However, Kuras does have a website
where he maintains credits for every game
he's worked on since 1993,
and he's still updating it today.
Next to Messiah, Joey puts,
design of all sound effects.
After witnessing someone claim Joey did it,
change their mind, delete the story,
and then talk in very vague terms
about who did what,
seeing someone just say,
I designed all the sound effects
is like a breath of fresh air.
This is another reason why I find Tommy's first version
of the story more believable.
Not only is it untainted by his later discovery
how popular the sound was,
it's also what the other person
who worked on the game said,
but this really makes it look like
Tommy's stealing credit from someone else
who worked for him now.
It was just a hunch before,
but now, I dunno.
And here's when the fun, easy video
about the Roblox oof I was trying to make ended
and the horror of my new life began
because while I was on Joey's page,
I noticed something else.
Design of all sound effects
for Tony Hawk's Pro Skater.
This was very confusing to read
because Tommy spent the last several decades
saying he worked on Pro Skater.
Tony Hawk Pro Skater.
Tony Hawk Pro Skater.
Tony Hawk Pro Skater.
Uh, I was on the original
Tony Hawk Pro Skater, uh, team.
I was on the original Tony Hawk Pro Skater team.
I'm not saying Tommy didn't work on it.
It's just some places seem to disagree with him.
Places like the credits of Tony Hawk's Pro Skater.
According to them,
someone else did the in-game sound effects.
I'll give you three guesses.
It was, it was Joey. It was Joey.
Although the company he was at is credited as well.
It's like they're saying sound effects
done by this guy from this company.
But Tommy's acting like he personally did it again.
I'm starting to feel a bit bad for Joey.
Just to kind of add to the mystery,
he talks about how small
the development team was at the time.
To kind of add to the exclusivity of it, I guess.
You know, being a part of the original,
uh, Tony Hawk Pro Skater team,
you know, there's only about maybe 10 or 12 of us.
This means very few people exist
who could possibly contradict him.
How convenient.
It does make it even weirder though
for such a small team to leave his name
out of the credits.
I guess Tommy could say his name is in there
but only because his company is named
Tommy Tallarico Studios.
So who is responsible for the sounds in Pro Skater?
The guy credited for it or his boss
who says he did it now?
In an older interview slash house tour,
Tommy got a bit more specific.
He said he'd buy skateboards.
Oh, sorry.
I mean we'd buy skateboards.
We'd buy skateboards.
And then Tommy would help
this mysterious other person record the sounds.
He says one of the pain sound effects,
ironically also a kind of oof,
is his actual voice.
The actual sound in Tony Hawk
that you hear when the guy falls off the skateboard
and cracks his head open.
Uh, pfft.
Ugh.
That's me falling off, cracking my head.
Ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh.
So Tommy might have helped with some of the sounds
or at least at some point Joey recorded him
falling off a skateboard.
Strangely though, while he says he was
on the Pro Skater team nowadays,
at the time things were very different.
You see, as I mentioned earlier,
Tommy was on a TV show about games
while Pro Skater was being made.
The thing about journalism is it's usually frowned upon
to cover or review a product you helped create
without disclosing you worked on it
and to his credit, Tommy's very good at this.
When he and co-host Victor cover games
he was involved with, they make sure to say it.
Take Advent Rising,
a game he composed a ton of music for.
Advent Rising.
I'm not gonna comment on any of the music
in the game because I am completely biased.
This is, and I mean this unironically,
ethical gaming journalism.
Also, you might have noticed,
but Tommy kind of likes to brag about games he's worked on.
One time they reviewed an Aladdin game
and they brought up that Tommy worked on
a different Aladdin games music eight years before.
It was a great throwback to the 16-bit platformer days
and I know you worked on the original Aladdin game
so you must have felt like you were coming home.
Deja vu!
Yeah.
Tommy not only understands disclosure,
he loves doing it.
If Tommy worked on a game
or a game similar to the one being reviewed,
you hear about it on this show.
So what does it mean when Tommy doesn't say
he worked on a game?
While Tony Hawk's Pro Skater was being made,
it was featured on the show.
Tommy interviewed one of the developers.
Later, when it came out, Tommy and Victor reviewed it
and both gave it a 9.5 out of 10.
If Tommy worked on this game's sound effects,
he would have said so, wouldn't he?
Well, he doesn't.
At no point whatsoever in the coverage
does Tommy disclose he worked on the game.
Tommy behaves like a TV guy
interviewing a game developer,
which would be a bit weird if he was also
on that development team, right?
I can only think of a few reasons
why Tommy wouldn't mention he worked on the game
when he goes out of his way to do so normally.
One is he randomly decided not to take credit
for something which seems out of character
and pretty dishonest considering how hard
he promoted the game
and he seems to know better than that.
The alternative is,
while he had helped Joey out a little,
Tommy, at the time,
didn't consider whatever input he gave
big enough to justify telling people
he was involved,
which is fascinating to me.
There is potentially a past version of Tommy
who, if he honestly thought about it,
would choose not to say he worked on Pro Skater,
which is cool of him.
However, then Pro Skater went on
to be a really famous franchise
and it became very cool to say you worked on it.
I was on the original Tony Hawk Pro Skater team.
And over the years,
Tommy's story has grown a bit
from helping with some of the sounds
to, uh, doing all of them.
I was on the original Tony Hawk Pro Skater team
so I did all those, uh, sounds.
I was audio director on that.
Uh...
Wait, now he's saying he was the audio director?
He's not even in the credit!
Let's quickly look at who did what
on games Tallarico Studios worked on.
On the vast majority,
Tommy is often credited for music
but he doesn't do sound effects much.
Sound effects, or sound design as it was later called,
is usually done by Joey.
A game Tallarico Studios worked on
almost always has music by Tommy,
sound effects by Joey in the credits.
Basically, when Tommy and Joey work on games together,
it's pretty clear who did what.
In fact, in the early 2000s,
Tallarico Studios put out a sound effects library
you could buy and use in your own projects
with over 19,500 sound effects in it.
Tommy's the executive producer
so I'm sure he was involved in some capacity
but three other recorders and editors are credited
along with the sound designer.
I wonder who it could be.
It's Joey. It's always Joey.
Joey credits himself as the lead sound designer
at Tallarico Studios for 13 years.
The thing he did was sound effects.
Even on electric playground, Tommy's show,
Joey is credited for additional sound effects
so maybe Tommy didn't say he did the sound effects
on Pro Skater because he knew Joey would see it.
Given Tommy's tendency to take games
his sound effects guy is credited for
and say he did all the sounds,
what does that sort of thing mean
for his later claims about Messiah and Making the OOF?
Well, wouldn't it be funny
if Tommy also reviewed Messiah on TV
and when he did, he again did not mention
he worked on the game?
Wouldn't that be very, very funny?
Yeah, it is funny. That is what happened.
Even funnier, on that same episode,
they also reviewed the Dreamcast version of Pro Skater
giving Tommy yet another opportunity
to say he worked on it, which he didn't.
There's starting to be a precedent
for Joey doing things, being the one credited for it,
Tommy reviewing it and not mentioning he worked on it,
and then years later deciding he did.
Coming back to how he talks on the stream,
we could mean we both worked on this sound,
but to be cynical, it can also mean
Joey did it while working for me.
Messiah is one of the two or so games
I could find that Tallarico Studios made
where they are both credited for the sound effects at once
so potentially Tommy might have been more involved
with the sound effects on this than normal.
So our candidates are a guy who mostly did music
and not sound effects, reviewed the game on television
and chose not to say he worked on it,
and when he later decided he did and he made this sound,
carefully avoided taking credit for anything specific.
Um...or the guy credited for sound effects
on almost every other game who says he did it,
who Tommy said did it before he changed his mind
the first time, and whose name is on the file.
In conclusion, who knows?
Could have been either of them.
Maybe it was both.
Art is really a collaborative process.
Okay, that was written as a joke
about how heavily the deck is stacked here,
but let's be serious.
I haven't found any definitive proof here.
I think it's interesting just how much Joey is credited
for sound effects everywhere else,
and I think it's weird that Tommy didn't really have
any specifics to say about what he did on the sound,
and I think if he did work on the game that closely,
he should have said so when he reviewed
the game on television,
but none of that is specific proof
of who recorded or mastered a specific sound effect.
However, given all of this additional context
and information, I can say at least for myself
that I have some trouble believing Tommy
when he says he made the sound,
but when you decide something a well-known industry figure
like him has said is suspect,
you start to ask, well, what else has he said?
This guy's been around for decades,
and he's said a lot of things.
I started investigating some of his other claims.
I did it mostly to prove to myself
I was just being silly so I could believe him
when he said that he made the sound.
I wanted to be able to put this to bed
and move on with my life.
I just couldn't accept that the first American
to ever work on Sonic would lie like that.
Hey, wait a second!
♪♪
Yes, Tommy has repeatedly said
he's the first American to ever work on Sonic.
In fact, I was the very first American
to ever be hired by the Sonic team back in the day.
Are you serious?
Very first American.
Yeah, very first American to be hired.
One of the first Americans to ever be hired
by Sega of Japan for the Sonic team.
I was the first American to ever be hired
to work on the Sonic the Hedgehog series.
But if you don't take Tommy's word for it
and do your own research,
by which I mean basically Google Sonic for two seconds,
you start to see red flags.
Sonic was being developed in America as early as 1992
when Sonic 2 was being made in California.
Americans are all over Sonic's game development
since almost the beginning.
Which game did Tommy work on anyway?
Sonic, uh, some of the, uh,
or one of the Sonic games, Black Knight.
That might have been in the 2000s.
So Tommy was about 20 years late
to the party of Americans working on Sonic.
Okay, let's be charitable.
Maybe he means first American to do music for the series?
But if he thinks that,
Tommy's been crushing too many 40s.
That was terrible.
I promise to live and learn from this.
Oh, fu-
But this first American stuff gets even deeper.
There are layers to this shit.
One particular American musician,
Michael Jackson, was rumored for decades
to have worked on Sonic 3.
This was seemingly confirmed
by Yuji Naka earlier this year, actually.
This would make Jackson the first American
to do a Sonic soundtrack.
Maybe there are some Americans who worked on one earlier?
I'm not sure.
I'm not deep into Sonic lore.
I'm no Heriton Splimby.
Now, you could say, well, sure.
Maybe that means Tommy is wrong
about being the first American.
But there's no way he could have known that.
We only found out for sure recently.
And yeah, to be fair, that would be true.
Were it not for the fact Tommy has also been bragging
about knowing back in the 90s that Jackson worked on Sonic.
So I was really close with the, uh,
the Sega folks back in the early 90s.
I don't know if it was ever confirmed or not,
but, uh, but I can tell you
that he did do the music for Sonic 3.
This was at a con in 2014
before he started saying he was the first American.
So either he knew he was lying when he started saying that
or he made this shit up too.
Which one is the lie?
At this point, why not both?
I don't trust this story about knowing
about Jackson either, frankly.
I think he just made up a story to seem involved
with another important piece of history.
That seems to be his M.O. at this point.
This is just one example of what we could
charitably call exaggeration,
but realistically we call lies.
The more I tried to check things Tommy said
to prove to myself that any of it was true,
the more it all came apart.
Okay, so what about the Metroid Prime thing?
He said in a bunch of places, including the OOF stream,
that he worked on Metroid Prime.
Uh, Metroid Prime with Shigeru Miyamoto,
uh, worked on that for, uh, for a couple of years.
And I worked with him on Metroid Prime,
the first one, and we worked together for about,
gosh, I wanna say four or five years.
Metroid Prime, I worked with that
with Shigeru Miyamoto for five years.
I worked with Shigeru Miyamoto,
the creator of Mario and Zelda,
worked with him for five years on, uh, Metroid Prime.
He doesn't just say he worked on it, actually.
He says Shigeru Miyamoto was a personal huge fan of his work
and always wanted to work on a game with him.
We always talked about working together.
Like, oh, man, I really love all your Mario stuff,
and he'd say, oh, man, I love all your stuff that you do.
Like, oh, we gotta work together sometime, you know?
I don't know if that part of the story is true,
but Tallarico Studios was contracted to work on Prime.
Not music, by the way. Prime already had a composer.
They just did sound effects.
That might turn out to be important later.
But early in development, Retro cancelled
all their other projects to focus on Prime
and suddenly didn't need outside help to get the audio done
and his contract wasn't renewed.
Tommy will confirm this part of the story himself.
My contract was coming to an end
was around the same time that Retro's projects
were all getting cancelled except for Metroid,
and they had an internal audio department.
So he did work on it, briefly,
but again with the exaggeration.
For him to be dropped so easily implies Miyamoto
wasn't as invested in working with Tommy as he says.
Tommy doesn't just say he worked
on Prime's sound effects for a bit
and Miyamoto was a huge fan though.
His story gets way more exotic.
He tells people Miyamoto didn't give him
any direction or visuals or animations
to make sound effects to.
He told him to just make what he thought was cool
and the development team designed the weapons
and animations around his sounds.
Give us a bunch of epic weapon sounds
and then what we're gonna do
is I'm gonna give those to my artists
and then they are gonna be inspired
by the sounds that you make
and we're gonna inspire the art and the thing.
Wow, so cool.
This is an unprecedented amount of control
for an external audio contractor
to have over a project.
Plus it just doesn't mix very well with the fact
he left really early in development.
Did Miyamoto change his mind?
Why didn't he make Retro keep him on board
if he had such an important job?
It also doesn't mix with other stories
from Retro Studios' actual audio department.
He did an interview for ShineSparkers
where he told this story about Miyamoto
letting him design the weapon sounds first.
However, ShineSparkers then went on
to interview Clark Wen, Prime's audio lead,
who came on board after the other games
were canceled and Tommy was gone.
Wen is well-respected in the game audio industry.
He's worked on a bunch of stuff,
including Tony Hawk games, interestingly enough.
According to him, they did sound effects
the normal way, basing their work off the art
and animations. There's something amazing
about reading an interview with Tommy
where he's blessed to the project
with a radical new technique where the sound designer
had massive creative control over the game
and then going to the interview with Wen
where they say, we interviewed Tommy
and he said you did this and he goes,
that sounds cool but no.
Wen says one or two weapon sound effects
were done when he got there and he left them
mostly untouched, so a few of the sounds
in the game are done by Tallarico Studios
and they might have been done the way Tommy said
but his overall involvement with the game
was very small. How small?
He left so early in development
they forgot he had worked on it
by the time the game was done and forgot
to put his name in the credits.
A bunch of other audio contractors made it in though.
They must have kept contracting people
after he left and not got him back.
Weird. I wonder why. After seeing Tommy
repeatedly take credit for the work
of people under him, it's kind of cathartic
seeing a bunch of other people get credited
and for him to be forgotten.
However, he's not the only one.
Someone's missing from Tommy's version
of the story again. Can you guess?
In a now-deleted page on his website
accessible via the Internet Archive,
Tommy wrote about leaving early in development
although he still claims he did a lot
of the main sound design somehow.
Funnily enough, he doesn't say
I too much. He says we.
I wonder who the other per-
It's Joey! It's always Joey!
He shared a recent email from Retro's
new audio manager to prove he worked
on it and he compliments the work
Tallarico Studios did but he says
it like this.
My hat is off to you, Tommy and Joey!
It's always Joey!
What makes the story even funnier is how,
you know, Tommy was on a TV show that reviewed
games when Prime came out. Tommy didn't
mention he worked on it, which makes sense.
He was barely involved but one fascinating
thing that hasn't come up yet is Tommy
just has terrible taste.
JoJo's Bizarre Adventure?
The characters are incredibly stupid.
He complained about Prime's backtracking
and scanning system, stuff people
love about the game, and absolutely refused
to let Victor get a word in edgewise.
I had to scan every little thing.
There's a great story in there as well.
And that's a problem for me. I enjoyed all of that.
The worst problem about this game is that-
He gave it a 7.5, which
according to Metacritic would be the absolute
lowest score any remotely professional
critic gave it at the time.
Even less than the 8 the guy who wrote the text
reviews for EP gave it. Tommy was
not the biggest fan of this game
but now it's universally recognized as a
masterpiece, he can't wait to tell you
he was a huge part of it. It's kind of
fascinating how these two supposed
industry professionals each talk about
their work. Joey doesn't mention Prime
at all on his site. Presumably
he doesn't consider his work a large enough part
of the finished game to go on a resume.
Meanwhile, Tommy talks like he worked
hand-in-hand with Shigeru Miyamoto
for five years on Metroid Prime.
Oh, come on, H1. Be reasonable. He doesn't say
it like that. No, he says it like that.
I worked hand-in-hand with Shigeru
Miyamoto for five years on Metroid
Prime. But he said on his own
website he left early. He left
so early they forgot to put him in
the credits. He knows he's not telling
the truth when he says this. Okay, look,
maybe I'm just a gaming racist
but is it okay at this point to
call this an obvious lie? It must
be very difficult to work hand-in-hand
with someone on a game they famously did
not work on very much. Retro Studios
is based in Texas. Miyamoto
was a distant producer who occasionally
gave notes. Several former
retro employees have even suggested he
gave Metroid to a new company in America
that hadn't made any games yet because he didn't
like Metroid that much. Some insinuating
he didn't really get Metroid's
type of gameplay. Miyamoto pawned off
IPs like this repeatedly, actually.
He visited Rare one day and made them turn
a game they were making into a Star Fox game
because he had no idea what else to do
with Star Fox and we all know how that
turned out. It's actually pretty good. People are
just mean. Prime is great but it happened
because Miyamoto outsourced an IP he didn't
like to a bunch of Americans so he didn't
have to think about it, which gives very different
implications to Miyamoto asking
Tommy to do the sound effects. So now
almost every game he's bragged about working on
has turned out to be a gross exaggeration.
The only other games he talks about are
Earthworm Jim and Aladdin. I guess
there's one more. Uh, Guitar Hero.
Guitar Hero. Guitar Hero,
uh, franchise.
Uh, did some work on
some of the, uh, the first three
Guitar Hero games? You know, like some
of the games I've worked on. Disney's Aladdin,
Earthworm Jim, Guitar Hero.
Any of his songs on the soundtrack?
Uh, no. Did he do sound effects?
It doesn't look like it. Is he credited
on any of the games? On one of them,
yeah. According to a Joystick interview,
rest in peace comrade, he helped them
get an Aerosmith song on too because
his cousin is Steven Tyler of Aerosmith.
He's in the credits of Guitar Hero
too in the industry thanks section.
His involvement seems, I don't know,
kind of small. It's mostly people who
championed the first Guitar Hero when it came
out. You know, game journalists and celebrities
and Wil Wheaton. Interestingly,
alongside Brad Shoemaker, Ryan Davis,
and of course Jeff Gershman, also in these credits
is Patrick Klepek who 15 years
later would go on to make him delete a legal
threat by asking him a basic question.
This is the total extent I can find
of Tommy's involvement with the Guitar Hero
games, but I must be missing something.
The way he brings it up, you'd think he was massively
involved. I've worked on the Guitar Hero
games, the first
three, um,
the third one was Guitar Hero Aerosmith.
Um, now you know
why. I want to assume Tommy was
joking there, but at this point I
don't know. The more you look at Tommy's weird
exaggerations, overstatements
of credit, his use of we to
mean Joey, the more you see it.
It starts to take over your mind.
You start to ask yourself if even the stuff he couldn't
possibly be lying about is a lie.
Like, okay, are those
Guinness World Records real?
I assumed even if everything else was fake,
they would be real at least. There's no way
anyone could get away with such an obvious
lie. It would be too easy to check, but it turns
out if something is easy to check,
no one actually does.
["Dance of the Sugar Plum Fairy"]
["Dance of the Sugar Plum Fairy"]
["Dance of the Sugar Plum Fairy"]
["Dance of the Sugar Plum Fairy"]
Let's start with the big one. The person
who has worked on the most video games in their
lifetime.
That's what he calls it, at least.
I hold the Guinness world record for the
person who's worked on the most video games in their
life. My mother's very proud.
The person who's worked on the most video
games in their lifetime. My mother
is very proud for the person who's worked on
for the person who's worked on the most video games in their lifetime.
So that was pretty cool. My mother's very
proud for the person who's worked on
the most video games in their
lifetime, which is kinda, kinda crazy.
Kind of a cool honor. My mother
is very proud. The person who's worked
on the most video games in their life.
Yeah, my, uh...
My mother is very proud.
There's several problems
with this one. Let's start with how the number
of games he's worked on keeps expanding
and not in the sexy way.
By the time of his first Guinness world record in
2008, he'd worked on the production of
272 games. Around
this time, he stopped doing music for games
and started focusing on Video Games Live.
Video Games Live takes up such a huge
part of your time and your career,
so have you ever considered going
back to, like, full-time video game composing?
No. There was this period
in the early 2010s where the last game
he'd officially worked on outside of
Super Tofu Boy was Sonic and the Black Knight.
The last game I composed for was
actually a Sonic game, and that was a couple
years ago, but yeah. But somehow, two years
later, he had a record with over 300
games on it. In October 2017,
he said he'd worked on over 300 games.
In fact, I have a Guinness world record
for the person who's worked on the most video
games in their lifetime. Over 300 games.
But by the time of the OOF stream in January
2020, just over two
years later, it was over 350.
And, uh, I've worked on
over 350
video games. He had a busy
couple of years there. I read today
300 video
games you've had your hands in.
That can't be a real number. That's actually
350. Yeah, it's up to
350 now. That I know a lot
of people in the industry.
I've worked on 200, uh, 350
games in my career. Okay, Tommy
seems a little confused himself how many
he's done, so, you know, just for his
sake, we should probably double check how
many. So, uh,
is there a list somewhere? His Wikipedia
page lists far less games than
he says he's worked on. Fewer.
God damn it. I used Wikipedia for that visual
earlier showing the games he'd worked on in the early
2010s. Let's show everything else he did
afterwards. Nothing. He cameoed
in Retro City Rampage and that's it according
to Wikipedia. His IMDB splits
his credits into a dozen different
categories but not games, television
and movies because it's a horrible website,
and the composer and sound department credits have
a bunch of games repeated in both.
Wow.
He's credited for some of them three times.
Even Messiah's in there twice.
Earthworm Jim 2's in there
four times? But even adding literally
all the video game credits together
including all the duplicates, you get
less than half the number he said he'd done
15 years ago. What
the fuck is happening? His Moby Games page
lists about 100? Uh,
it's 6.13 AM right now
and my eyes went a bit blurry while I was counting.
It could be like 98. Either way,
it's a lot less than 350 and I'm not
recounting this shit. And that's counting a bunch
he's just in the thanks for like Guitar Hero 2.
He doesn't list Pro Skater because
he's not in the credits for that even though Moby
Games appear to have copy-pasted the official
biography from his website which claims he
did. They somehow managed to get Pro Skater
to link to the correct game page
but not to get the spelling right.
Okay, none of these websites can be trusted.
Thankfully, Tommy has taken it upon himself
to make his own list of games on his website.
This list is larger and I mean
a lot larger than the others
and since Tommy wrote it, there's some
dubious names on here. Pro Skater
and Guitar Hero are on there and so is Metroid
Prime. Obviously, he personally held
hands with the development team while they made it
but so is Prime 2, a game I've never
seen any mention of him touching anyone's
hands on. Did they reuse some sounds
him slash Joey made?
So that counts as working on both?
And I guess I can now add Roblox
to that list of games.
If Tommy thinks he can put Roblox
on the list of games he has worked
on...
imagine what justifications other
games are on this list for. One of Tommy's
actually interesting contributions to game
history is early PlayStation 1
models came with a demo disc to show what the
console could do and some of his music
is in the menus and titles. The first
sounds ever made by some early
PlayStations would be music made by Tommy.
This is kind of neat and cool
and it's also weird seeing
PlayStation demo disc in a list
of games composed for. In general,
this list has quite a bit of what we
call padding. Tallarico Studios
did additional music for the first
Blood Rain so that's one game
worked on, right? Well, it's on Tommy's list
five times as each console version
along with PC and Mac.
I'm not sure why you'd wanna give Blood Rain such a
strong presence on your resume but
each to their own. He also did the music for
Earthworm Jim 1 and 2.
An Earthworm Jim game is on his list
18 times!
Super Tofu Boy, a free Flash game
Peter made he donated music to
is on here twice! You can run
Flash games on the Mac too? Wow,
that's an extra game worked on.
Fuck you, Tommy! But even counting
all of this, all the games he wasn't credited
for but still puts on his list,
the multiple times the same game is counted
across many different consoles or
computers or demo discs
as specific games worked on,
it's still a lot less than
the number he says. If you decide
to be a bit mean and remove all the repeat
games, you get around 175.
Almost 100 less than his
first Guinness World Record said
15 years ago. So either
he stopped updating his website and
IMDB, MobyGames, Wikipedia
and everywhere else also stopped tracking
the games he worked on or
Bob, forgive me, the first American
to ever work on Sonic is
exaggerating again. In an interview in 2010,
he said he worked on
280 video games, which is a Guinness
World Record. Actually inside
the Guinness Book as the person who worked
on the most video games in their life.
This sentence almost
made me cut my fucking head off.
Tommy isn't actually inside
the Guinness Book of World Records he's talking about
here. Trust me, I checked.
He is, however, inside that year's
Guinness Book of World Records
Gamer's Edition. The Gamer's Edition
is full of more game-centric records.
Notice that it's also much smaller
and the print quality is much worse and
generally it's a lot less prestigious than being in
the actual book. My producer,
Kat, left a comment on that line in the
script saying, it's a bit like saying you gave a
TED talk when really you just gave a TEDx
talk, not realizing how fucking
funny she was being because
Tommy has done a TEDx talk.
My mother's very proud. When his biography
on his website calls it a TED
talk. He is exactly that guy.
She is so cool. I
love her. Tommy is at least featured
in the Gamer's Edition. It's a two-page interview
about his career and video games live.
At the beginning of the interview, the author
claims Tommy has worked on more
game soundtracks than anyone else.
They don't say how they verified this
or provide the list of games.
It seems a bit like Tommy just told
the interviewer this in the interview
and they repeated it as a factoid assuming
it was true because why would
someone tell such an obvious lie?
Whatever evidence he has backing up his claim
is becoming difficult to find. Luckily
this wasn't too expensive on eBay.
Uh, supplies are quite low but
the demand...it's just me
basically. I mentioned how surprisingly cheap these
were to Mandalore Gaming and he started bulk
buying them to leave in Airbnbs he
stays in, like a sort of gamer-dian
Bible. So if they seem
more expensive now it's because he's artificially
inflated the price. Speaking of
artificial inflation, even if the amount
of games Tommy says he's worked on
was completely true, there are
still people who've worked on way more games.
The record is just wrong.
Even Guinness at some point recognized
this. They actually changed the
wording of the record at some point after
he first got it. It's not person who
has worked on the most games in a lifetime
anymore. It's most prolific
composer of game soundtracks.
The Guinness website says that now and
the updated versions of Tommy's plaque
say that too. So Guinness have done their
best to correct this mistake.
Tommy, however, has continued using the original
name anyway for over a decade.
In fact, I own the Guinness
world record for the person who's worked on
the most video games in their lifetime.
My mother's very proud.
Another one of those sweet little lies we've
become accustomed to Tommy using.
Although I can kind of understand this one
because the new name is even more
obviously a lie. I know for a fact
Tommy has not made 280
video game soundtracks.
We need to acknowledge just how bonkers this clip is.
He's saying most video games in a
lifetime while showing footage of
the new record with a different name.
Bonus points for the fact the record says more
than 300 games but then it cuts to
a list he wrote with less than 300
games on it. And just in case it needs to
be said, no, Guinness are not a real record
keeping organization. They're a novelty
book company. It's already a pretty
common joke that most of their records
are just silly stuff someone made up so
they can have a record. Like,
most baseball bats broken
in one minute. That's a silly one
I just made up now. Just kidding. It's real.
I don't really mind if Guinness track a bunch of
silly records. It's just a
bit of fun really, but they are an utterly
for-profit organization.
Not just in terms of sales of books
but also sales of records.
Guinness has an entire subsection on their
website dedicated to business marketing
solutions, promising they can help with
PR and marketing campaigns, complete
with a case studies section showing over a
dozen pages of companies they got attention
for by helping them come up with a new record
to break, like Canon with its
longest digitally printed photograph.
If you have the money, you can pay them
to help you break a record. I have my
suspicions a lot of the silly record holders
are independently wealthy people. You know,
some people just want a record to call their own
to give their empty lives a sense
of meaning. Guinness aren't purposefully keeping
track of who's broken the most bats
or wasted the most money on a Pokemon
card. Having a Guinness adjudicator
on site to verify and give out the
award on the day is super expensive.
At minimum, $10,000
plus transport and hotel costs.
This stuff gets expensive fast.
They aren't a neutral party tracking human
achievements. They are a paid service
and many of their record holders are basically
just customers. You'll notice
that when it became clear someone else
should have the record for most games made in a
lifetime, they didn't give someone else
the record. They changed it to one
Tommy was more likely to have. I'm
curious how much they charge for this service.
Guinness' record search function claims
Tommy is involved with two more. These are
for video games live. What great marketing
these must have been. They are most video
game concerts performed and
largest audience for a live video game
music concert. Let's quickly appreciate
how sneaky these records are.
VGL haven't come close to
performing the most concerts, but
for most video game concerts,
now that's a record, and it's highly
specific so no one can challenge it.
In fact, you literally can't challenge it.
The Guinness website says these records are not
accepting active submissions. This is
a special record only Tommy
can get. And wouldn't you believe it?
At his 357th concert, one of
those prohibitively expensive adjudicators
turned up to hand him the latest version
of these two records, but let's look
closer at largest audience for a live
video game music concert for a second.
Uh, the biggest symphony show
ever seen live. Over
752,000
people watching us
live in Beijing, China. This
would be pretty impressive.
Would you be shocked
if I told you Tommy's story is inaccurate?
Not all of those 752,000
people were watching in person
in Beijing. Some of them were watching it
digitally on a live stream on a Chinese
video website. Biggest symphony show
ever seen live. 752,000
people
watching me live on stage.
That was in Beijing. It's a bit deceptive
to say they were watching you live
on stage when they were nowhere
near the stage. How many people were actually
there? Uh, the famous
um, uh,
Bird's Nest National Olympic Stadium.
We played there. 130,000 people
inside. 600,000
people outside. I love that he says
outside when he means we're watching
a live stream. Like, is he trying to imply
that hundreds of thousands of people stood
outside just to hear his show?
But 100K people attending a concert
is still a lot.
Still alive-o! You know, I couldn't help
but overhear what venue he said
this took place at. Bird's Nest
National Olympic Stadium. The Bird's Nest is
a beautiful stadium, and it must be amazing
to play in front of 130,000
people there. In case you're not familiar
with the Bird's Nest, allow me to read you
the beginning of its Wikipedia page.
You're an hour deep into a video about the Roblox oof.
I don't have anything better to do.
The National Stadium, also known as the Bird's Nest,
is an 80,000 capacity
stadium in Beijing.
I think I might have noticed
a very small discrepancy.
During the 2008 Olympics, it hit its record
attendance of 89,000 people.
Tommy is claiming he got better
attendance than the Olympics and can
fold space, but because it's Tommy,
there are layers of mistruth happening here.
You see, Tommy has the name of the venue
wrong. Guinness has an article about
his record, and they say it was set at the
Beijing Exhibition Theater, which is a
different place. At first, I thought this
was just a one-off mistake. VGL
have played both venues, but the thing
is, though, he always says it's the
Bird's Nest. Uh, there was the Bird's Nest
in China, Beijing National
Olympic Stadium, 750,000
people. Now, maybe he just has
the names really mixed up in his head. They are
both in Beijing, after all, although it is
a bit weird to forget where you set
your Guinness world record, but whatever.
But is there maybe a reason he
says the name of this theater while claiming
he played to hundreds of thousands of people?
Well, there's one.
It would be even more impossible to play to
130,000 people at a theater
with only 2,700 seats.
The Guinness article also
happens to mention the actual number
of people physically at the concert.
2,086 people.
So even when Guinness has the numbers,
he still makes shit up.
Tommy, anyone can check this.
What are you doing? I don't trust that many
people were watching the live stream either.
There's no easily obtainable record of the live
viewership from the Chinese streaming platform
this appeared on, so we, and apparently
also Guinness, just have to take Tommy's
word for it that almost exactly 750,000
people watched this live.
And considering we just caught him
lying about this exact thing,
I have my doubts. Even though
he has a record with a specific
number written on it,
the number keeps changing. In an interview
in the 2017 Guinness Book
of World Records, the gamers edition
of course, he directly claims over
a million people saw that show live.
I cannot stress this enough.
He is literally lying
to Guinness
about a record Guinness just
gave him.
I just can't fucking believe
it.
I can't fucking
believe it. That's all three
of the records Guinness appears to have on file
for Tommy Tallarico. Tommy seems
to know better though. His list of awards
on his website says he has four,
the fourth one being most video
game concerts in a year, a record
I cannot find anywhere other than
his list of awards and other interviews
with Tommy, so I don't know. Maybe
he has four. Well, his biography says
he currently holds five, so I don't know.
The numbers just keep going up.
Can he at least get the record straight
on the number of records?
Okay, to be fair, he has recently
updated it. Lately, he started
saying he has...
seven.
Um, I have seven. Seven Guinness world
records for different things.
So what are all the others? You know, for a guy
who, let's be frank, fucking
loves bragging about all the shit he's done...
I've worked with everybody.
I was the first American...
Tommy is uncharacteristically modest about
saying what these other four records are.
In a Reddit AMA a few years back,
he said he has seven, but just to avoid
wasting people's time, he only listed three of them.
Would you like to guess which three?
When someone directly asks him to list
the records, he sheepishly adds
most game concerts in a year, but that's it.
The others are like ghosts.
Tommy, how many Guinness world
records do you have?
Um, that's... so I have seven.
Um...
one of the ones I have is
the most symphony
shows in a
single year, but I would say there's
three big ones. The three big ones are
most shows,
biggest live show ever
seen, and then the, um,
the most video games. So I have
a total of seven, but there's three big ones.
He doesn't even have a riddle prepared for this one.
He just refuses to tell people.
He's so shy all of a sudden.
Luckily for us in Tommy's investor
videos for the Amico, we can see at least
five of them, so let's just take a look and find
out for ourselves. In the center we have
most prolific composer of soundtracks.
Okay, can't verify he's done that many
games, but we at least know that one. The two either
sides say most video game concerts
and largest audience. Those are the three we
know he has. Now for the mystery ones.
To the right we have the record
for the most video game concerts perfo...
This is the same record.
This is the previous version. This one's from 2014
with 293 shows.
What about the one on the left? The longest
video game concert video
games live which has performed 260...
These are the same three records!
It's starting to look like there's a good reason
the other four records don't get mentioned much.
In one house tour he gave in 2017
he has them all laid out on the floor
where they appear to have sat for five years now.
Look at that dust bunny. And Tommy calls them
seven different Guinness World Records.
There's seven of them.
Uh, seven different Guinness World Records,
so... I'm not sure how these can be
seven different records if when you pause
the video and look, several of them are the same
and I think when people get too up close
and personal with his records they start
to notice this too. In this clip
he talks about two of them, ones we know,
and then this weird cut happens.
That was the first one. That was the first one. Yep.
And then, uh, and then the... for the shows
and then the... Where is he?
I didn't edit that in, I swear.
I'd love to know what happened between
these two clips. Here's yet another
fun fact. Guinness charges separately
for the award certificate and the plaque it
comes in. They have a unique design they don't
change very often and they're pretty expensive.
When Tommy got these two in 2014
it looks like he just bought two picture
frames from a store. I guess when you
have so many versions of the same record
already you get sick of paying full price
for them. I'm not just bringing this up
to make fun of him, although I am, but it's
actually really useful data. You know how
I mentioned Guinness renamed his most
games record? In this one tour with the
Super Awkward Edit, another funny thing
happens. Tommy reads out that record,
right? This is, uh, the Guinness
World Record for the person who's worked on the
most video games in a lifetime.
Wow. But because he got a
shitty frame for this one, we can
check and see the record
he's reading from says something else.
For the person who's worked on the most
video games in a lifetime. Wow.
Tommy refuses to acknowledge
the new title and pretends it has
the old wrong name because it's a
bit more prestigious. He's lying
about the text of a record he is
literally holding in his hands and
pretending to read from. This guy's
a fucking genius. How has he
never been caught? I feel like I'm going
crazy. You know how the concert records
say video game concerts?
If you've been paying attention, you'll notice Tommy
always says it's for symphony concerts
or symphonic concerts.
Biggest symphony show ever seen live.
The most symphony shows ever
done. Uh, the biggest symphony
show ever seen live.
Biggest symphony show ever seen live.
Tommy knows his video game concert
record is extremely stupid and out
of embarrassment he calls it something else.
Oh, maybe it's not deliberate. Maybe he just got the
name wrong. No, I can prove it. Here's a time
he does that while pointing at it and
pretending to read it. Here's one.
Largest audience. Largest audience
ever to see a
symphonic concert live.
752,000 people.
We can see what the record says in the
previous shot, Tommy. Okay, let's wrap this up.
How many records does
Tommy have? Through a list of games
that cannot be found but keeps exploding
and by making up new definitions of
concert, it looks like Tommy has about
three but he owns seven plaques of them
so he tells people he has seven
different Guinness World Records and
maybe he does have a most video game
concerts in a year one and it's just
never visible in shots of his records.
Guinness only has three records in their search
though. Well, had.
Um, I was gonna move on from Guinness
at this point but then there was a new development
in the search for Tommy's list of games.
After looking everywhere for the list
of 350 plus games
Tommy supposedly worked on or I guess
composed for now, we realized
there was one place that would definitely
have one. Guinness themselves.
So, we emailed them
and by we I mean Kat did it
for me, she did all the work.
That's what people mean when they say we.
They mean someone else did it for me.
We worked on the oof sound. Yeah, right.
I know this trick, Tommy. We,
Kat, asked them what evidence was
provided for the record and how it was verified.
Guinness were really polite and got back
to us very quickly. Here was their response.
The record title in question is one of our
consultant records which are not
open to standard applications.
They are confirmed by specialist consultants
that we approve.
Our expert external consultants that
we use for records of this kind often have
professional links to the field in question,
i.e. video games.
These titles are research based rather than
evidence based. Thanks.
First off, this email provides me the incredible
quote that the record is not evidence
based, which is just fantastic.
Thank you very much for that. This is one of the
situations where if you did the research,
you would have the evidence. This doesn't
require specialist consultation.
It's a list of games. On top of that,
this implies Guinness have never seen a list
either. The record was verified
by a consultant, so someone
somewhere says
Tommy has worked on this many games
and Guinness believes them.
But then, something even
stranger happened. Previously, when
you typed Tommy's name into Guinness' record
search, that record came up.
One of the other VGL records came up because
he's mentioned by name on that record. The other
one doesn't. So those are the ones that came up.
This is a screenshot I took in
early September. Anyway,
after we emailed them asking how they verified
it, I realized I needed to take another
screenshot because I'd scribbled all over one of them,
so I went back
and the record didn't come up.
Just the other one did.
Right after we emailed them asking
them where their evidence was
and they said they didn't have it,
the record disappeared.
Did we...did we
just get one of Tommy's records deleted?
Oh, no!
I didn't mean to do this.
I just wanted to see a list of games.
Tommy, if you're watching this, it wasn't me.
It was Cat. Please don't...
So now the brakes have come off and this video
is spiraling out of my control.
We've lost all hope of figuring out
what Tommy is doing or why.
Doing the early research before
this all happened, it got kind of
nostalgic going back and re-watching ancient
episodes of Electric Playground and
reviews on the run and watching Tommy do his
wacky boobery and yell at Victor when
he says normal things like,
Metroid Prime is fun. I was trying to remember
if I ever found Tommy funny or if I
was always just laughing at him,
you know?
You know what I gotta say to you?
I don't care what you think!
After doing that level of research,
I fell back into an ancient drama I saw
unfold as a kid and completely forgot about.
Tommy's awful opinions used to be a running joke
on forums discussing his show's reviews.
People would bring up he gave Smash Bros. Melee,
one of the most beloved games in human history,
a 2.5 out of 10.
It was a huge running joke.
I learned about this because I was a pretty big
Mega64 fan as a teenager and they shot some videos
at his house and even did an episode
of their podcast there. I remember watching this
on my iPod Nano on the bus.
This was shot just as Smash Bros. Brawl
had come out and the gang made fun of his
old review as well.
Tommy is pointing to the giant model dinosaur
he has in his garden.
Anyway, it's clear this rumor really gets to him.
In an IGN thread about his Mario Galaxy review,
this comes up and Tommy T.
shows up to defend himself
because he Googles his name and has nothing
better to do. He claims it's not true
but refuses to say what the real score was
because he thinks it's fun watching people
spout nonsense, so Tommy never
gave Melee a 2.5. That's just a rumor.
Leave him alone.
Here's Tommy's review of Smash Bros. Melee.
What do you think about Super Smash Bros. Melee
for the Nintendo GameCube?
Well, you know, I gotta tell you, it's another GameCube
letdown, another GameCube
disappointment in my book. 3 out of 10.
I give it a 2.5.
He said this on TV. People saw him.
The footage exists. This isn't speculation.
When Tommy does something people criticize
him for, even something dumb that doesn't
need defending like a video game opinion,
he just lies and says he never did it.
Like, why would you lie about
something so stupid and easy
to check? I'm reaching the point where if Tommy
says something, it's easier to
assume he made it up. His website
used to have a page of famous people seen
wearing Tallarico Studios T-shirts
which is a weird thing to document in the first
place but the thing is though, every
single picture on it is photoshopped.
Like, what was his goal here?
What is he even trying to do?
Tommy's stratospheric levels of clout
chasing have hit a point where I literally
can't tell if he's joking. He has a
gallery page with pictures of him performing
and in magazines and so on and there's a
celebrities section showing off all the cool people
he's stood next to. Wow.
He's really proud of some of them because he keeps
reposting them. This Jamie Lee Curtis
picture pops up on his Twitter when she's in the
news or it's her birthday. She's a wonderful,
kind, and talented human being and
a fan of my video games live show
but one of the pictures on here is really strange.
This one is of the Dalai Lama apparently.
Before the Amico situation deteriorated
to the point he stepped down, he used
to post on the Atari Age forums and people
were discussing the Amico's Karma gaming
engine, a feature Tommy later
admitted he made up by the way.
During the conversation about Karma, someone
referenced the Dalai Lama so of course
he reposted that picture and said he met him
in London and he liked his music.
The issue here is this later turned out to be
a wax statue of the Dalai Lama
from the Madame Tussauds in London.
This is an example of what I've decided to call
the Tallarico event horizon.
Tommy has lied so much
about so many things, I can't
even tell if this is meant to be a joke.
Is he doing a bit?
Is Tommy Tallarico a CIA experiment
to see how far you can get in the liberal
games industry by just making shit
up? Is Tommy Tallarico just
a shadow on the wall of a cave?
I...I started making
this video because I thought a sound effect
was funny! I can't tell if he's joking
or if he genuinely wants to convince
people he met the Dalai Lama. Like I
said, this was in a conversation about an Amico
feature it turned out he made up.
We have something that's called a
karma gaming engine
and what that means is that
everybody, no matter what your
skill level, can feel
like you have a chance and that you're
in the game. I'm interested
in the fact that you're using the karma gaming
engine. Uh, where, where did that come
from? Okay, so the karma gaming
engine is just some shit we made up.
Okay! Like he literally
made it up to get people to invest
and admitted it later. Everywhere
you look, Tommy is trying to build
more prestige in ways that make no
sense. Once Tommy had fled the
Atari Age forums after calling everyone
a gaming racist and stepping down,
people started posting about how weird
he was being and a guy told a story there
about how he ran a display at the Houston Arcade
Expo in 2018 showing off old
Intellivision stuff right when the Amico
had just been announced, so he asked Tommy
if he wanted him to put out some business cards
advertising the Amico, which he did.
His display won an award at the show and
mentioned this to Tommy. He allegedly asked
him to mail him the award. If this
story is true, Tommy just assumed
that this award belonged to him.
This is just an allegation. Normally
I wouldn't bother putting this in the video,
but the problem is it tracks so well with a
lifetime of taking credit for things he didn't
do and making up awards.
I find this story too believable
not to mention. Still, this doesn't
mean Tommy hasn't done good work
in the industry or had any legitimate
achievements. To properly recognize the good
work he's done, we ought to talk about
GANG. The Game Audio Network
Guild is a group of industry professionals
dedicated to improving the craft,
helping people network, and recognizing
people's achievements with awards.
Tommy has won a lot of awards from
the Guild over the years, at least 16
by my count, and he's clearly very proud
of them because he puts them all up next to his
Guinness World Records.
Tommy Tallarico
is also the founder of GANG.
Recently, uh, I founded a non-profit
organization called the Game
Audio Network Guild or
GANG. It's really funny seeing
Tommy give tours of his house in his GANG
t-shirt and of his office with his GANG
desktop background and then going to his
website and seeing 16 awards from
the group he founded and was on the board of directors
of at the time. Tommy Tallarico,
composer and sound designer
for video games, also the
president of the Game Audio Network Guild
also known as GANG.
GANG even gave an award for best
sound library to that sound pack he
made with Joey's help. They've only given
out that award four times in their 20
year existence by the way.
And again, these are award
winning sound effects.
At least we know the sounds in the Roblox kit
really are award winning. Like, at this
point, research for a video that was
supposed to be about the Roblox oof
has gone so far off course
that I needed, like,
something that was baseline obviously
true to hang on to so I could
return to sanity. So
I asked myself what I thought
would be the most obvious question.
Was Tommy even on
Cribs?
On YouTube, like I said, there's a lot, there's videos
of your house and MTV
Cribs I was on. It's awesome,
right? You did an MTV Cribs?
Yeah.
Yeah, they were my house. Didn't you have
an episode of MTV Cribs back in the day?
Yeah! Like he tells
people it was Cribs, he uploaded a video
to his YouTube channel saying it
was Cribs.
So was it?
No!
Cribs is, you know, a TV
show. It has lists of
episodes. You can just check.
It was obviously a lie the
entire time. I don't know how no one
called him on it. Do gamers just not know
what Cribs is? Cribs went
to the home of massively successful
musicians like Snoop Dogg and Maroon 5
or other really big celebrities
like Tony fucking Hawk.
They did not go to the home of the guy
who might have made some of the
skateboard sounds for his game.
Absolutely no normal person
watching MTV in the mid-2000s
is gonna know who Thomas the Tallarico
engine even is. He did the soundtrack
to Earthworm Jim. He's not
a celebrity. Nobody gives a shit
about his fucking fountain.
Waterfall here.
Which makes me wanna
pee at night, oddly enough.
My mother's very proud. Cribs
had very specific motion graphics and they
always showed the same factoids at the beginning
every time, using the same visual.
This video just has a wall of text.
MTV had a very specific vibe
with its backing tracks. This thing uses
easily identifiable stock music.
So identifiable, YouTube flagged it.
But if it wasn't Cribs, then
what was it? Someone in the comments says they saw
this on a disc that came with a gaming magazine
back in the day, but I think they're thinking
of the other times he did that. Because
Tommy's a massive narcissist, his website
has a video section with a meticulous
collection of his appearances and links to them
on YouTube, some of which he uploaded himself.
He links this one and calls it MTV
Cribs Here Too, along with two of his
PlayStation Magazine appearances. But here's
the thing. Tommy's website is ancient
and has several much older versions preserved
on the Internet Archive. On the version
from 2004, before YouTube was a
thing, he would just put the videos on his own
site. Many of the videos on the old site
ended up as links to YouTube videos on the
new one. The PlayStation Magazine house tour
and interviews are here, along with this around
the world in 80 games thing. There doesn't
seem to be a Cribs video on the old version
of the site, which is a bit of a red flag.
Additionally, there's one house tour that didn't
seem to make it to the new one, done by
GamerTV. The video itself
on Tommy's site wasn't archived,
but Gamer.TV was a show from the UK
about gaming hosted by Sam Delaney.
One episode had a feature on ways to make
money in the game industry, professional gamers,
voice actors, and of course,
a certain composer.
Hey, I'm Tommy Tallarico, composer
and sound designer for video games.
Hey, wait a second!
Hey, I'm Tommy Tallarico, composer
and sound designer for video games.
So this episode is using a cut-down
version of the footage we saw in Tommy's video.
So now we know who really shot
this footage. Gamer.TV used
to have a website, Gamer.TV.
Oh, that's clever. It's down now, but in
archives, it's clear the site used to have a video
section with extra stuff. One of the extra
videos appears to be about a gamer
with a Ferrari and a luxury home.
I think Gamer.TV met
Tommy and toured his house, used
clips from this in their show, and uploaded
the entire house tour as a bonus feature
to their website. The video linked here
is sadly not archived either. At least
not directly. It was preserved
if, say, Tommy downloaded
it and put it on his own website and then later
moved his video archive to YouTube.
This is a kind of cool act of video
preservation except for the part where it
somehow ended up being called MTV
Cribs. How did that happen?
I mean, the file on his website
was named correctly. This would be
a difficult thing to get wrong unless
he did it on purpose.
It's awesome, right?
Is Tommy just, like, a
pathological liar? Does he have to
lie to sound more interesting no matter
what? Like how he went from saying he did
some sounds for Prime to saying he worked
on it with Miyamoto for five years or how
he went from being one of the voices in
Pro Skater to the audio director or
how he went from doing three songs for Sonic
and the Black Knight in 2009 to
being the first American to ever get to kiss
Sonic on his little mouth? Every time
something comes up again, the lie has to get bigger.
In that newer house tour I showed,
the guy asks Tommy about if it was featured
on Cribs and he says it was on there more than
once. Tommy Tallarica
has invited me to his
MTV Crib. This hasn't been on
the MTV Crib, right? Uh, a couple times.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Why is he like this?
Why are you like
this? I know you're still watching,
Tommy. Explain yourself.
What are you doing? What are you
fucking doing?
So...
yeah. Maybe
every single thing Tommy
has ever said is a lie. Maybe
some of it is true, but bear in mind
that even if Tommy has
lied, that isn't, like,
a crime. You can just lie to people.
Watch. I am a trained
helicopter pilot. See? You can
just say things. No one can stop you.
However, there are times when lying
does become a crime, and Tommy
would know this intimately because it cost him
$100,000. In 2009,
after putting on a video games live event
in Brazil, Tommy returned to America
with over $100,000
in cash on his person. When you
enter America with more than $10,000,
you have to declare it for money laundering
and trafficking reasons. Tommy knew
he had to do this, but for some reason,
he didn't. His business associate,
who was also his brother, filed a customs
declaration on their common behalf, denying
they were bringing that much money into the country.
Tommy knew this was false. When he
was caught at a TSA checkpoint with a bag
with $100,000 in it, there were some
serious questions. He quickly made up
a story to explain himself. He told them he
didn't need to declare the money because he had
distributed it among his band members during
the flight in amounts less than $10,000
and then took the money back once they
were through customs, so no one needed to declare
anything. Tommy thought he was being clever,
but he had just accidentally confessed
to the crime of structuring, where you
deliberately avoid regulations by pulling
stunts like this. Structuring is a
federal felony with huge fines and
up to five years in prison attached to it.
Later, he came clean and told investigators
he lied and made up that story,
and actually he just took the money over the border
himself, so when I call Tommy a liar,
that's not just my opinion. There is
also a legal document signed by him
admitting to it. Looking deeper into
United States v. Tallarico,
that's its name. Tommy pled guilty,
was placed on probation for a year,
forfeited the $102,000 seized
by customs, and had to pay a $1,000
fine, plus a $25
assessment fee.
America! There's a really interesting lesson
here. In the game industry, you can just
lie about what games you worked on,
what sounds you made, and whether you worked
on cribs, and the only real repercussion
is people finding you unpleasant,
but if you try that with the TSA while carrying
a large, unexplained bag of money,
there can be consequences.
There are other ways lying can be a crime
too. For example,
if you lie to potential investors
to get their money. During one of Tommy's many
attempts to find investors for the Amico,
he told the exact kind of Tommy-esque
tall tales you would expect from him
but in a situation where doing so can get
you in serious trouble. In February
2021, he recorded this video
for potential investors and lists the team
of so-called Avengers working at
Intellivision, one of whom was Kara Acker,
a former marketing manager at Mattel
on Disney Princesses and especially Frozen,
which would be a great find for the company
and thinking she was on board might
well have helped convince investors to part
with their money. If we scroll slightly higher
on her LinkedIn though, we can see she actually
left Intellivision...
in 2020. But here's Tommy
telling people in 2021
after she was gone, he has
her on board, so you should definitely
invest.
Our VP of global
marketing used to work at Mattel
as one of the global
brand managers over there, right?
And she was in charge of the Disney
brand within Mattel, so
that's a double bonus there.
Um, is there a word for
lying to people? For money?
If this convinced people to invest,
they have grounds to say they were lied to
about the status of the company. You can't
just pretend people still work for
you. On their Republic crowdfunding campaign,
which raised $11.5 million,
the pitch video for these investors
featured Aka heavily in Tommy's
disgusting Egypt room as VP of
global marketing. She was front and center
as one of the intended draws to investors.
She was basically the company's pharaoh.
She's also still shown on
the list of team members, including,
ironically, a link to her LinkedIn, which
will tell you she's actually gone. This
crowdfunding campaign ended in 2021.
There was a period of four
months minimum where people were investing
based on a video and information
which was not accurate at the time and
never corrected. The Intellivision website
listed Aka as VP of global marketing
as late as July 2021
according to the Internet Archive. Did the
guy who ran the website quit too?
Investors using this website as a source
of information would have a hard time confirming
who was actually at the company.
People don't give, investors don't give
you millions of dollars unless you have hard,
cold facts. I certainly hope
there's some facts I missed here. People gave
this company millions of dollars.
Like, seriously, I hope for Intellivision's sake
Aka just put the wrong date on her LinkedIn.
Well, there's gonna be some questions.
In fact, if you click the invest button
on the Intellivision website, it takes you
to the same video with Aka still in it.
You know the Avengers, right? Marvel Avengers.
You know, they're the super team of superheroes
ready to save the world. Also on
Tommy's list of Avengers was Jay Allard,
the co-founder of the Xbox and Xbox Live.
This would make the company look like
it was on the right track and had some really
good minds attached to it. However,
Allard decided he wasn't a good fit
and left the company.
In 2020. Here's another one.
How about the guy who co-founded
and co-created
the Xbox, right? When Tommy
was saying Allard was on the team in this
footage, to get people's money,
Allard was already gone.
He was gone to such an extent
he didn't just change his LinkedIn to say he wasn't
at the company anymore. He removed
it from his page completely. Allard
unworked at Intellivision
and after this happened, Tommy
was shooting a new video telling people
he was in the Amico Avengers.
I mean, this guy doesn't even need to work anymore,
but he loves our idea
and concept so much that
he joined the team and has been making
huge, huge contributions.
This particular comment
is incredible because on another
investment platform, remember Fig? Tommy
had previously bragged about Allard's involvement
in that investor video too. He was actually
at the company when this one was made
at least and Intellivision's share offering
documents on Fig also claimed Allard
was involved and that he was the global
managing director. A while after Allard
had left, the SEC noticed
Intellivision's Fig was still advertising
he was there. Investors were technically
being deceived. Also, a major
member of staff like the global managing
director leaving could be causing
problems with making the product they were
promising to investors, you know? So
they asked Fig what was going on.
Orally, someone at a government
agency physically asked
someone at Fig what the hell was happening
at Intellivision. Fig asked Intellivision
to clarify. Intellivision panicked
and said they would change the documents
and product development was unaffected by his
leaving because, to quote Fig quoting
Intellivision, he has not played a material
role in product development
considering his contributions.
He joined the team and has been making
huge, huge contributions.
Uh... This is footage
of a CEO right before his company
tells a major government agency
Allard is gone and hadn't made meaningful
contributions telling people he's
on the team and has been making huge,
huge contributions to get
their money. I'm not a lawyer.
I'm just a helicopter pilot,
but I don't think it gets worse
than this. You know, this is the kind
of thing that's like, really? I mean,
talk about a slam dunk. The people
working at the company are the main pitch
for the Amico. Invest in me.
I don't lose. I have the best team.
I've been a winner in this industry
my whole career. I
don't lose, and what
I've done is packed our team
with other people who are winners.
Several of his key team members weren't
working there anymore when he recorded
this. One of them had even scrubbed it from his
LinkedIn. I don't think this is giving potential
investors an accurate impression of what they're
buying into. This is the exact kind of thing
Tommy normally does, but in this context
it's really bad, and this brings
us to the real question at the center
of all this. The big thing we've been avoiding
for the last hour while we circle
the drain, but we can't avoid it
anymore. Did Tommy make
the funny baby sound effect?
Remember when that was the point of the video?
When we look at the sum collective of all
of his claims, the Tallarico
totality if you will, and we put
it in context with, uh,
reality, when Tommy says he
created the oof, this might just
be me, but I don't believe
him. Although at this point, if Tommy confessed to
a murder, I would assume he was just trying to
be cool. I'm sure if I was a more reasonable person
I could say the evidence is all inconclusive
and Tommy could have worked on the sound
maybe, but right now all I
know is Tommy is a huge liar, and
I hate him, and he made me forget what this
video is about!
I promise you when I started making
this video, my goal was to make something
short for once. Take a break from
my longer projects to make a quick video
quickly so people knew I was
alive. I did not expect while I was
doing research for a rabbit hole to open
beneath my feet and to fall Wile E.
Coyote style into an abyss of lies
and madness and seemingly getting one of
his Guinness World Records sent to the fucking
Shadow Realm. I didn't choose this!
This happened to me,
and I'm not happy about it. I wanted this
to be a story about how in our modern age
we don't take ownership of artists' work
seriously enough through the lens of
a sound effect that had been reused without
credit for over a decade, but
the people not being credited in this story are
hard-working folks under Tommy who he
has taken credit from over the years
and the original voice actor, none
of whom will see any of the money Tommy makes
from selling their sound today.
It is incredibly easy for hard work
to be exploited by corporations,
and one of those corporations happens to
be called Tommy Tallarico Studios
Incorporated, but that's really a
structural problem, and we already all know
capitalism is bad. Statistically, your
most formative memories are of a global financial
crisis. You don't need that lecture from
me. I think the unique lesson of this story
is about, well, records
in multiple senses of the word.
What's really at stake here is history,
how these events and people
will be remembered. Tommy has cultivated
such a reputation that when I asked about
the origins of a famous punch sound effect
on Twitter, someone independently
brought him up and said they assume he
must have done it. He seems to have done everything.
At least he says he has.
The man has successfully inserted himself into
conversations about sound effects he didn't even
make, while the people who did the work
attributed to him evaporate into
namelessness. No one knows who Joey
Kouros is, and he made the sound effects
people think Tommy did. He worked on
fucking Fortnite. I've heard his
sound effects as they blast my silver
surfer into dust. It's not
right for him and people like him to be
forgotten. Games have always had problems
crediting authors correctly. Early
games were seen as products first and
creative work second, so credit wasn't
taken seriously. Creators used
to not be allowed to put their name on the game
and had to hide them in Easter eggs.
Mark Cerny, ironically another good candidate
for first American to work on Sonic,
wasn't allowed to keep any of his work or design
documents when he was working at Atari,
and his games were considered Atari creations,
not his. His source code,
notes, and documentation were only
preserved because someone got them out of a dumpster
when Atari closed the office and threw
it all out. This problem has especially
contributed to the perception of women working
in games. Yoko Shimomura, one of the
most well-known video game music composers
today, a veritable industry icon
one might say, composed all but
three of the tracks on the original arcade
version of Street Fighter II, but due to
Capcom's crediting policy at the time,
she was credited via a pseudonym. For her
music's appearance on console releases and
updated versions of the game, she was not credited
for her compositions at all. All credit
was given to the people who translated them to the
new formats. Her contributions to game
music history are only recognized
properly decades afterwards because
her early career was rendered invisible,
music she wrote often being credited to
someone else. This was widespread at
the company. The Capcom sound team throughout
the 80s and early 90s was almost
entirely women. Just think about
that for a second. An extremely influential
group of female early game
composers, all credited through pseudonyms
or sometimes not at all, and with the
ports of music they composed credited
to someone else. Maybe one of the reasons
game development is perceived as a male
dominated industry is because all the women
who've always been here keep getting
left out of the history they wrote.
If you're interested in the topic, I recommend
the Street Fighter Lady and Female Credit
by Andy Lemon and Hillegonda Rietveld.
I've linked them in the description and plagiarized
them heavily in this section of the video,
but even when people are credited, the recognition
can easily be minimized. Joey did
some of the music for the Terminator Sega
CD game, but as you can imagine, this
information has been rendered obscure thanks to
a much larger musician making sure his name
is remembered first. The official
CD release of the soundtrack has
Tommy V. Tallarico stamped on the
front. Its booklet says composed,
produced, and performed by Tommy Tallarico
and calls Tommy a veritable video game
industry icon, of course. The half a
dozen people who collaborated with him and
wrote the other half of the songs only
appear on the back of the case at the bottom
as footnotes with stars corresponding
to which songs they actually made,
so their names don't get noticed quite as much.
Joey's song was so good, Tommy saw
fit to put it on another album with his name
and face on it. Tommy Tallarico, Virgin
Games' greatest hits. Joey's name
is even smaller on the back of this one.
It's not difficult to see
why Joey's contributions to game history
are being forgotten. Reuploads
of the full Terminator CD soundtrack onto
YouTube just say composed by Tommy.
There's a reupload of specifically Joey's
song too. The uploader who understandably
missed the tiny note on the back
of the CD case credits it to Tommy.
The top comment is a guy called
Joey Kouros explaining that he
actually made it, but also thanking people
for their kind words. We're at the point
the actual composers have to
explain they made the song in the
comments of reuploads of their work
misattributed to their old boss.
This extends back into the regular music
industry as a whole, of course, but also
into material we covered here. Michael Jackson's
long-rumored, now semi-confirmed
work on Sonic 3 isn't all it's
cracked up to be either. Like a certain other
composer, Michael had people who worked
for him. According to Brad Buxer,
an American keyboardist and composer who did
a lot of work with Jackson and actually is
credited on Sonic 3, Jackson basically
made him do most of it. Once you're well
enough established, it only gets easier to exploit
the talents of people working for you
and build up your own status on the back
of something you made someone else do.
The industry is still constructed
in a way that treats individual creators,
usually the biggest names on the project,
as the true authors, attributing a game's
success to them and not the many
people who did the work. Things are
so bad even the recipients of this
praise have called it out. To quote one of
the worst articles ever written,
there's a tendency among the press to attribute
the creation of a game to a single person,
says Warren Spector,
creator of Thief and Deus Ex.
The journalistic attitude to credit in gaming
used to be so awful it's not even
clear who wrote this. The article
is credited to IGN staff.
Basically all success and
appreciation pours directly into
selected industry figureheads even
they're actively trying to stop it from
happening and a lot of them aren't because
even if it's a problem, it's a problem that
benefits them. You can tell a lot about
an industry by how it treats the people
who actually do the work. In terms
of the scope of time, the average
game developer is...fucked.
The hundreds and sometimes thousands
of people who work on games now throw
away years of their lives and so many
of them go completely unappreciated.
Meanwhile, the most asshole-ish men
in the industry continue to promote themselves
off the back of the efforts of the people working
for them. Imagine making great sound effects
for years and years only for your boss
to tell some guy in a Halloween
mask on a live stream with a hundred views
that he did it. We don't recognize
the work and achievements of people who
make games. We recognize the people
who exploited that work the best.
It's so easy for history and
credit to get wiped away. Case in
point, we could have never learned
that the oof was from Messiah and assumed
Roblox made it forever.
But it's not even the Roblox oof.
In my household, we call it the Messiah
oof. There are thousands of people whose
good work on games will never be properly credited
who we might have already forgotten
about. Gaming is still a young medium
but already the sands of our
history are spilling through our monster
energy sodden fingers. Entire
games are at risk of being forgotten
never mind the human beings who created
them. The most valuable contribution
Tommy has made to the story is mentioning
that the voice actress was the daughter of someone
who worked at Shiny Entertainment at the time.
Her father
worked at
Shiny Entertainment. The girl
whose voice was the oof would be close to
30 now. She might even have heard it
and not even known it was her. She might not
even remember recording it. The people who know
who this was and the parent who worked
on the game, those people aren't gonna be around
forever. We have a limited time
to learn who this was. The thing
about history is it happens
and then it's gone. If we don't
work to preserve it, eventually
it becomes impossible. To quote a famous
Nintendo quitscreen,
everything not saved will be lost.
And just as a kicker how hard it is to remember
things accurately, the popularized
version of the quote is wrong. It's actually
anything not saved. I'm not trying
to be a pedant for once. It's kind of
poignant how easy it is for things to shift
like that. If we don't set a precedent
of taking people's work and the accuracy
of records of who did what seriously,
we leave it to the liars and opportunists
of the world to make up
that history to the spin-off of a
beer company to tell us who did what
and it honestly, on a spiritual
level, fills me with immense
grief thinking about the people who made
the things I care about dying
unrecognized for what they did and being
forgotten. Gaming is just old
enough that we're losing that first generation.
Tommy got the rights to
Intellivision because he bought them from the estate
of its last president when he passed away.
The name, the branding, it's his
now. The original Intellivision
YouTube channel with some of the final appearances
of its former president, one of
the world's first ever game designers
along with the original Intellivision website
with its beautiful web 1.0 history
of the company are now relegated
to obscurity under another name
while Tommy continues to use
that name to advertise a product that
doesn't even exist. The damage
to a history people are at real risk of forgetting
whose main characters
are dying might already
have been done. What history will look
like 20, 30, 100 years
in the future is being decided
now. Now is the time to
decide if Tommy Tallarico
made the oomph for Roblox
or if Joey Kuras made it for Messiah
and Tommy has already put his finger on the
scale, decided how he wants all this
to be remembered. If you buy his new
sound pack, the metadata in the
Roblox oomph has been changed to say
Tommy Tallarico. Those who fail
to learn from history are doomed to
repeat it. That's a quote commonly
attributed to Winston Churchill, but he
was actually probably paraphrasing George Santayana.
That was me being a pedant.
Old habits die hard, but here's a corollary
I came up with all by myself.
Those who let hucksters write
the history they're trying to learn from
are doomed in some other horrible
way, and for one, I
don't think history gets to be written by
a guy who wasn't even on Cribs.
It wasn't even Cribs!
Oh, hello there!
Thank you for watching this
30-minute video and a couple of
other videos.
I hope you enjoyed it, and I'll see you
in the next one.
Bye!
...accompanying feature-length meltdown.
The boom mic is slowly, uh,
peeking into frame.
Anyway, thank you all so much
for watching all of this, and, uh,
I hope you had a good time, and
I hope to see you again soon...
for once.
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
When I bought this, uh,
gamers edition on eBay, you know, when I was
flipping through it, a bookmark fell out.
This is a bookmark for Alexander.
Well done for all your hard work
in year two this year from Miss Dunn.
Goodbye. So,
Alexander, uh, I've no
idea who you are or where you are
now or if you'll ever watch
this video. Um...
I hope you made Miss Dunn proud.
I've no idea how old you are now. This book came out in, like,
2008. I'm not gonna do the maths on that.
Um, but if you want your
bookmark back, email me,
and I'll happily send it to you.
Please do email me, in fact, because
I can't throw this out
like that would be wrong.
So this is just gonna be in my life
forever until someone claims it, so
please take this back.
