That's good. I've never had this book. Good. Wow, that is good. Good luck with our t-shirts.
Wait, where is it? Writers Tears. Tears of Laughter. Yeah, because so many tears were
shed. Oh, I cried. So many tears were shed reading the books that led to this project.
Ours is awesome. I should know because I've read it eight times by now. Because you've
done most of the work on it. Yes, I homogenized. I took all eight of our writing and tried
to make it sound like Stephenie Meyer. And by Stephenie Meyer, I mean Sarah Ellenson.
Sarah Ellenson, yes, our author. So the way that I homogenized it mostly was looking for
repeated phrases that people were using for a protagonist's voice. For instance, I noticed
that Nella had her say, oh crap, a lot. Which is rather Fifty Shades. Well. So I went back
and added a lot of crap to the other chapters. Literally. I looked for places that needed
crap and I put that crap right in there. It wasn't as hard as I thought it was going to
be. It didn't take me two solid weeks of doing absolutely nothing. It was time consuming,
but otherwise not like mentally straining. It was enjoyable work. I don't know, I think
everyone has a worst thing, but I think for a lot of people's worst thing is the querying
process. Yes. Where you actually have to court industry professionals to like your product
and want you and your product and your ideas and that's terrible and awful and I hate it.
To do a query, there's a process to, you know, a standard formula that most people use is
you write a query letter, you look up agents that are interested in the kind of book you're
writing. So we would look for agents that are seeking young adult paranormal romance.
So basically no one in the world anymore. And if you're seeking that, then we would
read their submission guidelines, which will say either send us a letter and a summary
or a letter and a full manuscript or a first three chapters. But each agent is different.
You want to make sure you're sending the right thing if you want to make a good impression,
which I'm not sure we do. But Lisa, I'm Sarah Ellenson. I don't understand why I need an
agent. Doesn't my work speak for itself? Well, Sarah, publishers don't really do the slush
pile thing anymore. Mostly for copyright reasons, as I understand it. A slush pile is a giant
pile of bad writing. No, it's a giant pile of any writing. Yeah, it's mostly bad, but
that's just sturgeon's law. Anyone who sends in a thing they've written to someone who
they want to buy it, it ends up in the slush pile. So these people will get these submissions
and because there's so many of them, they call it the slush pile. And it's mostly bad,
but that's just sturgeon's law. Your stuff is probably brilliant. Your stuff is great.
But it will end up in the slush pile, just like our stuff, which is brilliant. Genius.
It's brilliant. You'll love it. So what does a query consist of? It's basically the back
of a book blurb. It doesn't even have to have a hi, how are you, but the most important
thing is the back of a book blurb. She was running from her past. This is the one sentence
right here. The one sentence hook, which says, I am intrigued. This interests me. And Hunger
Games is a good example because it's a good book. In the ruins of a place once known as
North America lies the nation of Panem, a shining capital surrounded by 12 outlying
districts. I already want to know more. Something's happened to North America. The first line
of your book is supposed to be a hook. The first line of your back of the book summary,
your query letter. If this was your query letter to an agent, you'd be on the right
track. Here's my favorite 50 shades of gray. And our first line here is when literature
student Anastasia Steele goes to interview young entrepreneur Christian Gray, she encounters
a man who is beautiful, brilliant, and intimidating. That sure is what happens. Who cares? That's
not getting my interest. I'm not like, I must know more. The world was. If you ask, go on.
It's not out of actual interest because no, really what happens then? And you're going
nowhere. Little did she know about the bodies in the basement. The only thing remotely interesting
about this is beautiful, brilliant, and intimidating. But how is that different from anything else?
How does that set this apart? It doesn't from bad to worse. Yeah. Okay. This, okay. I don't
actually physically have the copy of this cause we have the ebook version. This book
Tiger's Curse is literally the worst book I have ever read. It is the worst. Yeah. It's
the worst book that was actually professionally published by actually publishing the worst
book I've ever read. And here's the as per Goodreads blurb. And it's also the worst blurb
I've ever read. Oh God. Okay. Passion, fate, loyalty. Oh, well, okay. All right. That makes
me want to read this book. Notebooks have that. Yeah. Okay. All right. And then again,
it starts over. Like apparently that, okay. And then it's, would you risk it all to change
your destiny? Oh, well I'm just like, okay. You know, you read those like never do this
about queries. And I feel like that that's, that's not up there. It's like the, would
you rhetorical question. And then the only thing worse than that is the last thing Kelsey
Hayes thought she'd be doing this summer was trying to break a 300 year old Indian curse.
And it's like, okay, the last thing Lego brick thought that they'd be doing was going on
an epic adventure. Like that is the worst book. Oh God. And it just goes on from there.
It's terrible. It's, it's a terrible, terrible blurb for a terrible, terrible book. It's
really bad. There are other ways to go about it. For instance, Twilight takes a slightly
different approach and Twilight being, you know, the spark of all of these. Hold my whiskey
please. All right. It starts off. It has a quote on the back. A very famous quote about
three things. I was absolutely positive. First, Edward was a vampire. Second, there was a
part of him that didn't know how dominant that part might be. That thirsted for my blood.
It's intriguing. It's interesting. It's a quote straight out of the book. Didn't have
to put any extra thought in that. I mean, if we have a quote that's actually interesting
in our book, we can talk about it. Third. And third, I was unconditionally and irrevocably
in love with him. I mean, it's got romance. It's got danger. It's got blood. This is much
better than the previous two. Yeah. Like, you know, I guess that's kind of all you need
to know. And then, you know, and bear in mind, these are not query letters. This was a professionally
published book. It was always professionally published, unlike Fifty Shades and Tiger's
Socks. Well, okay, there's also this one. All right. Ireland has been blessed with great
poets and playwrights down through the centuries. However, most, if not all, of our great writers
suffered from writer's block. That's pretty good. That's one book at a time. Many sought
comfort and inspiration from the water of life. Whiskey. That's not a book at all. It's
got a book blurb on it, though. Better than Tiger's. It's much better than the Tiger book.
It's also more delicious. Yeah, it's also, it's better in every possible way. You're
not paying us, we swear. Yeah, no. Writer's Tears, a delicious, quality Irish pot still
whiskey. Available only in Ireland. You don't know what hell I went through to get this,
by the way, that I could find a whiskey called Writer's Tears. Thank you. And bring it back
to New York. And bring it back to New York and write it off on my text. It says, I traded
my tomorrows to remain in yesterday. Whiskey tears are falling now. Each one cries another
day. Still better than Twilight. Still a better low story than Twilight. Me and my tears.
So our query letter, our back of the book blurb. Yeah, what is our hook? We can't say
Twilight with Cthulhu. Yeah, but I feel like that is the hook. Would you like to read a
paranormal teenage romance with Cthulhu? Yes, romance has to be in there. It has to be about
love. It has to be about her being the chosen one, being the only one prophecy that can
save the world. We should do the thing that the Tiger book does where it's like, you know,
would you? Terrible rhetorical question. Yeah. Well, we have to say something about a mysterious
beautiful boy who hates her at first. Yeah. And she's like, why does he hate me? I think
that's our book. That's what's going to get people to want to read this. Then we just
like sprinkle hints about like, you know, immortality and having the key to destroy.
Yeah. I think it needs to be like only she has the key to stopping him, but not in the
way he ever dreamed. And the word dream has to be in there. Of course. Yeah. Lots and
lots about dreaming. Yeah. And that might be the title of our book. Yeah. We're still
working on that. We're still trying to figure out the title. Yeah. Give us titles. Yeah.
Right now the best one we've got so far is dream colors. I'm really not kidding. There's
dreams and there's calls. It's a little weak. Yeah. Too bad we can't go like, I mean, Stephanie
Meyers wanted to name it Forks. Forks, which forking sucks. So now we're up to the serious
business point. We're actually having to figure out where to send this and how to send it.
So, since everyone is now in on the joke and we start having our Facebook page, which
you can, you can like our author here. And the photos are, we paid for the photos. They're
licensed stock images of a lady. Just so you know, like it was that lady, like she's a
professional model and we paid for them. Yeah. Now is the point where, you know, you're in
on the joke, play it straight. You're in on this solemn venture with us. It is an experiment.
Especially for other readers who aren't you. Like I feel like that's where it's really
interesting. We're not looking to trick anyone. We just want to see what we can do. We're
not out to hurt anyone's feelings. We're just, we're, we're, we're trying to make, we want
to see what sells. Yeah. Naked came the stranger. Naked came the salute. I've always wanted
to be a little bit of an Andy Kaufman. Yeah, exactly. So, so it's like when you like the
Facebook page, it's not us, it's actually the lady. If you follow her on Twitter, which
is here, tweet her like she's an actual human. When you, when it comes to that, you know,
when it's on Goodreads, you leave actual reviews, like either good reviews, you know, or bad
reviews like, yeah, you could say it sucks, but treat it like it's a real book. Treat
it like it's legit. Like from now on, it's like, from now on, you are our actors in this
grand experiment. As always, follow us on Twitter at Shay Apocalypse and tweet at the
silly book, sexy alien book for the silly stuff and leave your comments, suggestions
for the query and our title, which we still don't have, and all that fun stuff down there
and you know, watch us on blip.tv and sorry you missed out on these incredibly sexy shirts.
They're so cute. Look at his eyes, they have sparkles. I missed the memo. I say he got
the ice cream from Uncle Neil. Yay! And as always, if you live in Ireland, I'm jealous.
For many reasons, but yeah. Well, think of how much they have to pay tax-wise for this
stuff. Duty-free! Yeah, duty-free! Cheers!
