I was going to make this video about the timeline of the coronavirus outbreak in China, and
as part of that I tracked down an internet rumour that the virus started in a Wuhan lab.
But that rumour has suddenly become front page news, so I'll cut the video short and
just focus on that. I'll leave the rest for another day.
There is a growing belief that the Covid-19 virus originated in the Wuhan lab.
An intern was infected, who later infected her boyfriend, and then went to the wet market
in Wuhan, where it began to spread. So who is this female intern working in a
Wuhan lab, who got infected? Before all this blew up in the mainstream
media, weeks ago I was already following it up, prompted by a post on the forum of my
last video. They knew as early as October 18th 2019 that
this virus had leaked, and that's the day it leaked out of the Wuhan Level 4 biolab.
Unfortunately the poster didn't give a source, but other believers in the lab leak claim
do. First that, a scholar from the South China
University of Technology recently published a paper.
Actually it wasn't so much a published paper as something he wrote and shared on a science
forum. It was posted on 23 different websites around the world and then spread around the
blogosphere. The author's name is Xiao Butao.
But this commentator got his information from a video called I found the source of
the coronavirus by a YouTuber called Laowai86, and I tracked a lot of the Wuhan lab escape
rumours back to the same video, which got over 2 million hits.
Now spoiler alert, Laowai86, real name Matthew Tai, hasn't actually found the source of
the coronavirus. But he does outline a theory that's been bouncing around the Chinese
blogosphere for weeks, and he gives a very comprehensive account of all the evidence.
I'll pick out the bits of his video that give the gist of the story.
Xiao Butao, he was a professor, he posted a thesis. The professor directly pointed out
that the main source of the virus is from the Wuhan lab, which is only 300, or actually
280 metres to be exact, from the Huanan seafood market. He also gives a clear timeline and
has information that researchers were splashed with urine and blood samples from all the
bats that were collected. People working in the lab claim to have been splashed with coronavirus
containing vials. Huang Yanling was a researcher in the lab working on the virology of bats
with Shi Zhengli, and she's missing. Most people believe her to be patient zero, and
most people believe she's dead, and her online presence has been scrubbed from existence,
all happening in a lab 280m away from the Huanan seafood market. The December 24th posting
acknowledges that they've made a big discovery in human transmissibility, and they need more
help to deal with it.
I hope you all followed that. If not, here's a summary of the theory. It all sounds very
well researched and very convincing. But of course it needs to be fact checked, and the
way we do that is to ask two basic questions. What's the evidence, and what are the sources
for this evidence? There are three main lines, starting with the aforementioned Xiao Butao.
He knew researchers at the lab that were infected.
Correction, he didn't know any researchers at the lab. This is where it pays to check
by reading the source, Xiao Butao's internet post, which I'm showing you on the screen.
He didn't even know the lab. He said he discovered the two labs in Wuhan, not one, by doing a
search on the internet. One is the Wuhan Centre for Disease Control and Prevention,
just 280m from the Wuhan seafood market, where the virus was thought to have spread. The
other is the Wuhan Institute of Virology, about 12km away.
The professor directly pointed out that the main source of the virus is from the Wuhan
lab.
OK, but which one?
Which is only 300, or actually 280m to be exact, from the Huanan seafood market.
Ah, so Matthew Tai is referring to the Wuhan Centre for Disease Control and Prevention,
which we'll call the Wuhan CDC. That's the one 280m from the Wuhan seafood market, and
the one he shows on the map.
He also gives a clear timeline and has information that researchers were splashed with urine
and blood samples from all the bats that were collected.
No, Xiao Butao says one researcher, with the initials JHT, was splashed with bat blood
and urine, on different occasions, while he was collecting samples in caves nowhere
near the Wuhan CDC, which is the institute he worked for. The timeline is not clear,
but as we'll see from Xiao Butao's 2017 source, this happened several years before
the novel coronavirus outbreak.
And they had already begun self-quarantine after they showed symptoms of being infected?
No, again, there's no they. This was one person, far from the lab, and he showed no
symptoms of being infected. All this is spelled out in Xiao Butao's post, which Matthew
Tai is supposed to be quoting.
But I hear you say it says on Matthew Tai's screen that the researchers at the Wuhan virus
laboratory were splashed with bat blood and urine. It says so right there.
But what Matthew Tai's video is showing you on the screen, for some reason, is not
Xiao Butao's post, but a translated report from Radio France Internationale. It comes
from their Hong Kong correspondent, and as we'll see, it's ridiculously inaccurate.
The professor directly pointed out that the main source of the virus is from the Wuhan
lab.
No, Xiao doesn't say that at all. He only says it's possible, and plausible, and probable.
These are three different things, so take your pick. But nowhere does it say that the
main source of the virus was the Wuhan CDC or any other research facility.
But that's what Matthew Tai and his followers now believe, so let's figure out how this
story got so terribly mangled and embellished in its many retellings.
Xiao Butao's information about researcher JHT and the bat blood and bat pee comes, he
tells us, from a couple of media reports. He only gives an English translation of the
titles, the first of which is by a reporter called Tao, initial P. Based on that, I tracked
down an article with a similar title in Chinese by a reporter called Tao Pan, featuring a
bat researcher called Tian Junhua. If his family name is placed last, as in Western
tradition, that gives the initials JHT. The story tells of how on different occasions
blood and on one occasion urine had splashed on him while he was out collecting bats in
the wild, and that he had isolated himself for 14 days because of the risk of infection.
However, the article makes clear he was never infected. The timeline for these incidents
is after 2012 when he started collecting bats and before 2017 when the article was published.
This is the researcher in question, Tian Junhua, filmed for a documentary about his research.
And Xiao Butao seems to have accurately relayed what Tao Pan reported, just leaving out the
dates. The Radio France Internationale reporter then seems to have mangled these different
elements of Xiao Butao's post and embellished them. He turns a single researcher into several,
he merges the separate incidents of bat blood and bat urine into a single incident, and
then he moves the scene of the action from the caves of Hubei province into something
called the Wuhan Virology Lab. But there's no such place, of course. He's conflated
two separate institutes into one. Matthew Tai then adds an embellishment of his own.
Instead of these non-existent lab workers not being infected, he claims they were infected.
As I said, over two million people have seen this video, and of course lots of bloggers
and commentators have copied Matthew Tai's version of Radio France's version of Xiao
Butao's version of Tao Pan's version of the story.
OK, so let's look at Matthew Tai's second piece of evidence.
During my research, a name kept popping up. Huang Yanling.
If research means simply googling keywords like Wuhan, bat, and patient zero, and reading
blogs, chat rooms, Twitter, and its Chinese equivalent Weibo, then it's not surprising
that Huang Yanling's name keeps popping up, because she's been the focus of a conspiracy
theory circulated in China since early February.
So who is she? Huang Yanling was a researcher in the lab
working on the virology of bats with Shizheng Li.
Well, she wasn't any of those things. First of all, Matthew Tai told us that the lab he's
referring to is the Wuhan CDC, 280 metres from the seafood market. But Huang Yanling
didn't work there. She worked at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, which is 12 kilometres
away on the other side of the Yangtze River. And she didn't work on the virology of bats.
All of her published research is involved with finding a cure for the bacterial infections
streptococcus and methylen-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. She was investigating the pathway
by which these bacteria could be destroyed by viruses, nothing to do with bats at all.
And she's missing. Most people believe her to be patient zero, and most people believe
she's dead. Well, certainly a lot of people copying and
pasting this rumour believe that. But popular belief isn't evidence. So what started all
these rumours? Well, in February, when the virus outbreak
was at its peak in China, someone went onto the website of the Wuhan Institute of Virology
and noticed that there was no photo or bio of one of its ex-students.
This is China, where questions tend to be quickly followed by conjecture. Where's the
photo? If there's no photo, then she must be missing. And if she's missing, she must
be dead. And if she's dead, she must have been involved in bat research and died from
the new coronavirus. And if she caught the new coronavirus, then she must be patient
zero. The story spread across China and was then
popularised in the West by Matthew Tai. Most believe that her body was quickly cremated
and the people working at the crematorium were perhaps infected.
Now that could be true. It is possible most people who are copying and pasting this rumour
do believe her body was cremated and that the cremation crew got infected. Others believe
she spread it through her boyfriend. But again, popular belief is not evidence.
The most convincing evidence that she might be missing is that the government hasn't dispelled
these rumours by finding her. But the sad fact is that people go missing all the time
in China and it's not because they all contracted COVID-19. We're dealing with a country that
practises arbitrary arrest and where the slightest criticism of the government can lead to arrest
or detention or even imprisonment. It can lead to being fired from your job and relocated,
effectively banished, to another part of the country.
And if Huang Yanling is truly alive like they claim, why is her photo and bio removed?
I honestly have no idea, Matthew. And what would be the point in doing that anyway, especially
if her name and her graduation details are still there? She may be missing. She may not
be missing. She may have got run over by a bus. She could be one of many people detained
in China for political reasons. She could be living happily in Chengdu and doesn't particularly
want all this attention. I don't know. You don't know and the millions of people speculating
about this don't know either. We can't just jump to the conclusion that she must be patient
zero because YouTubers, bloggers and chatroom posters believe it. Matthew Tai's third line
of evidence is a job posting on the Wuhan Institute of Virology website. I'll let him
tell you what it says, then I'll show you what it really says.
Which basically says, we've discovered a new and terrible virus and would like to recruit
people to come deal with it. The December 24th posting acknowledges that they've made
a big discovery in human transmissibility and they need more help to deal with it.
OK, so it doesn't say any of that. Matthew is showing you a translation of only part
of the text he showed in Chinese. He's left all this out. And this missing translation
is the part that supposedly says the team has discovered a terrible new virus. In fact,
it doesn't say that at all. It says the team is engaged in long term research that's been
published in 110 papers and has identified a large number of new viruses in bats and
rodents. So these new viruses haven't just been discovered. The term is referring to
discoveries made over the last 10 years, and none of them is described as terrible.
Research into bats as carriers of coronavirus is taking place all over the world, from South
Africa to Germany, Kenya, Saudi Arabia, Mexico and of course the United States. Why? Because
these bats are known to be the source of coronavirus infection. And all these research institutes
also advertise for researchers. You don't need to take my word for all this. I put all
of these sources and links in the video description so you can check them. The theory that a female
intern at a Wuhan lab got infected and then spread the virus is not new. It goes back
several months. But its origins are unsubstantiated rumours on the Chinese language internet embellished
by bloggers, vloggers and news outlets on the English language internet, based on misreadings,
mix-ups and mistranslations. That's why everyone, especially mainstream media reporters, need
to fact-check this stuff before believing it.
But the idea that the virus leaped from a lab is just too good a story to let go. So
bloggers and journalists are conjuring up all kinds of new evidence. Like a photo taken
supposedly recently inside the secretive Wuhan Institute of Virology, supposedly showing
a broken seal on a fridge containing the SARS-CoV-2 virus. In fact, it was taken two years ago
and posted on the Wuhan Institute of Virology's own website, and it's still there, along
with other photos that the newspapers missed. So there were no SARS-CoV-2 virus samples
in the freezer, and all the virus samples that were there are held in sealed containers
frozen to minus 23 degrees centigrade.
OK, how about this?
So when she heard about the outbreak of the new virus, she was worried that it could have
come from her lab. She spoke about the sleepless nights she suffered worrying whether it was
her lab that was responsible for the outbreak.
Which is understandable. After all, it's possible someone might have come into contact
with bat samples and not noticed. According to the Washington Post, officials from the
US Embassy in Beijing visited the Wuhan Institute of Virology a few years ago and were concerned
about safety standards there. According to the Post, the Chinese researchers at WIV were
receiving assistance from the Galveston National Laboratory, but the Chinese requested additional
help. The cables argued that the United States should give the Wuhan lab further support,
mainly because its research on bat coronaviruses was important but also dangerous.
But after gene sequencing, it turned out that the new virus was not among the viruses collected
from samples taken in the wild. So is it possible it came from a virus the lab possessed that
was similar? That's the claim of a tabloid newspaper now being read out by this YouTuber.
One of the virus samples she had in the laboratory had a 96% genetic match to Covid-19.
What they mean is that it had a 96% genetic match to SARS-CoV-2. Covid-19 is the disease,
not the virus. The newspaper is referring to RATG13, a naturally occurring virus that
the researchers sampled from a bat in Yunnan province. But 96% doesn't make this the same
virus. After all, we humans share 96% of our DNA with chimpanzees. One research team may
have found a much better match, 99%, with a virus found in pangolins. But I can't cite
that definitively because the research hasn't been published yet.
Another popular theory is that the virus was deliberately bio-engineered in an effort
to study bat viruses and then accidentally escape from the lab. The favourite piece of
evidence for this theory is, supposedly, a 2017 article in Nature.
Researchers created a chimeric virus made up of surface protein SHC-014 and the backbone
of a SARS virus that had been adapted to grow mice and to mimic human disease. Kill them.
You'll notice the March Editor's Note on this because this appears to be obviously
related to the question of, was this created in a lab? They say, we are aware this story
is being used as a basis for unverified theories that the novel coronavirus causing Covid-19
was engineered. There's no evidence that this is true. Scientists believe that an animal
is the most likely source of the coronavirus. Well, ultimately, that would still be the
same, even if it was engineered, would it not?
No, it would not. Making assumptions like this based on a failure to understand the
difference between a lab-made virus and one that comes from an animal is exactly why Nature
warned you not to use the paper as the basis for unverified theories. And after reading
that warning out loud, you come straight out with an unverified theory.
Natural viruses and lab-engineered viruses are completely different. Because when researchers
are bio-engineering a virus, they usually don't build the entire thing from scratch.
What they're interested in is the business end of the virus, called the spike proteins.
They house the receptor binding domain, the RBD, where the virus attaches itself to the
host cell and the cleavage sites, where it breaks in and enters the cell.
So except in exceptional circumstances, they build the spike proteins onto the structure
of an existing infectious virus. I suppose the best analogy is graffiti artists. They
usually don't spend lots of time and money building an entire wall from scratch in order
to spray paint their art. They find an existing wall and use that.
When researchers at the Scripps Institute examined the genetic make-up of the new coronavirus,
they discovered that the whole thing was new. Not only that, there was clear evidence that
the virus had evolved. It had genetic sequences that could only be obtained in the presence
of a complete immune system. Battle scars, if you like, showing that it had been forced
to evolve by adapting and trying to overcome immune responses. You don't get that by artificially
growing a virus in the presence of isolated cells.
The Scripps Institute researchers published their findings in Nature Medicine, with the
clear conclusion that it wasn't a laboratory construct. One of the researchers told Science
Daily these two features of the virus, the mutations in the RBD portion of the spike
protein and its distinct backbone, rules out laboratory manipulation as a potential origin
for SARS-CoV-2. The fact that this virus wasn't engineered
rules out another rumour in the English-language blogosphere that it was a bioweapon developed
by the Chinese, and the rumour on the Chinese blogosphere that it was bioengineered by the
US Army. Analysis of the virus has ruled that out.
The Australian tabloid this YouTuber and many others are copying from claims it got all
its information from a leaked dossier compiled by governments, but it won't show it or
tell us who wrote it. A secret leaked dossier does sound more reliable than bloggers, YouTubers
and tabloid newspapers, but it doesn't contain a single piece of information that couldn't
have been found on the internet with a simple Google search.
The information about a 96% match, for example, comes from a Nature paper by Chinese researchers
including Xi Jinping, published in February. The fact that the authors of the supposed
dossier thought Covid-19 as a virus says a lot about their expertise and the extent of
their research. And the information about a chimeric virus
built in a laboratory is hardly secret, it comes from this February paper in Nature.
The quotes about Xi Zhengli worrying that the virus might have come from her laboratory
were published in April in Scientific American etc etc. No need for the telegraph to invoke
a leaked dossier, all this could have been just as easily written by an intern trawling
through the internet and copying and pasting publicly available information.
But as researcher Peter Darshak says, let's look at the balance of probability, that's
what you have to do. That's because there's another laboratory
in China which is a much more likely source of the infection. Unlike the Wuhan Institute
of Virology or the Wuhan CDC, which have just a few researchers handling bat samples using
safety equipment and protocols, this secretive laboratory outside Wuhan employs thousands
of researchers, it's never been inspected by anyone outside of China and yet it has
a much lower level of biosecurity than both of the other labs. Safety equipment here is
completely absent and there have been numerous cases of researchers coming into contact with
bat blood and bat urine. I'm sure you'd agree that this laboratory is a much more likely
source of infection. Now that I've got the attention of the lab
leak believers, the place I'm talking about isn't actually a laboratory. It's the countryside
and the researchers are actually just Chinese farmers and villagers who venture into the
woods and caves around Wuhan, trapping bats for food and digging bat guano for fertiliser.
People live out in rural areas close to bat caves. They're exposed every night when bats
fly over them, urinate, defecate, maybe onto their food or into their drink. And people
go into bat caves, people go in for various reasons. They're going to dig out the bat
guano, the faeces, and they use it as a fertiliser, just like we used to do many years ago with
bird faeces. They go into caves to shelter from the rain. They're farmers, they're subsistence
farmers hunting and eating wildlife, so they get exposed that way.
Even tourists visit caves crowded with bats and infested with bat urine and faeces. So
if the virus made the direct jump from bats to humans, these places where thousands of
unprotected people come into contact with bats and don't isolate themselves are a much
more likely source of infection. So why don't tabloid newspapers write stories about this?
For the same reason I had to call it a laboratory to get people's attention. Secret labs full
of reckless scientists and dangerous experiments releasing deadly viruses make headlines and
sell newspapers, peasant farmers collecting batshit in caves. Well, you can see why people
prefer the lab story. But all that assumes the virus jumped from bats directly to humans
in the first place. Although bats are probably the reservoir for the virus, most researchers
don't think they passed it directly on to humans. According to DNA analysis, SARS-CoV-2
first evolved around 50 years ago in bats, and then most likely spread to humans through
an intermediate species. That was how previous viruses have spread, SARS through civets and
MERS through camels. A likely pathway for SARS-CoV-2 was through pangolins. It's the
world's most trafficked mammal, highly prized in China for food as well as having its scales
used for traditional medicine. As I mentioned earlier, one so far unpublished study found
a virus in pangolins that shared 99% of its DNA with SARS-CoV-2. So what has the Wuhan
seafood market got to do with all this? Well, very early on it was clear that many patients
coming into Wuhan hospitals with pneumonia-like conditions had a connection to the market.
A paper in The Lancet, a British medical journal, confirmed this. It's possible it came to the
market from outside and spread there simply because it's the kind of place where crowds
of people come together, but it's also possible the virus started there. Not by bats, which
weren't sold at the market, but through other animals sold there. Epidemiologists and virologists
have been warning for years that these wild animal sales, where exotic species are brought
together, often alive in closely packed cages, are a breeding ground for new viruses. They've
been calling for the Chinese government to shut them down and stamp out the trade. That's
where the attention needs to be focused, and that's why the Chinese government needs to
be held accountable. It's always easier to blame scientists because that makes for a
better story and a more juicy conspiracy. Most people don't understand science, and
they don't read any of the published research that comes from these institutes, so it's
easy to convince them that these places are secretive and mysterious. It not only sells
newspapers, it sells t-shirts.
