Ah, here I am in my childhood bedroom.
That's what it is. This is what my childhood bedroom was.
Look, I think all that matters is that I had a normal childhood
and my experience is made for hashtag relatable content!
AHH!
Because recently I've been thinking an awful lot about nostalgia.
You're probably wondering, why are you filming on a bed with all of these stuffed toys?
Are you trying to rip off Jenny Nicholson so that you can finally catch up to her in terms of subscribers?
And the answer to that question is...
Yeah. But also, for another reason.
Okay, we're gonna get into some real deep Hbomb lore here.
But for the first... decade of my channel,
it was basically just a place where I posted whatever random videos I thought were funny,
and Let's Plays and stuff like that.
But I also used to do, like, a web series that was making fun of video blogs.
It was just me with a camcorder messing about. It was silly.
In that old video series, I used to have a sequence where I would go to my bed
to answer viewer emails.
And really, it was just a way of using all the jokes that I thought of
that had nothing to do with the rest of the theme of the video.
Basically, it was just a technique used to justify doing something
completely unrelated to what people actually wanted or expected.
And, um...
So I'm using it now for a different reason.
Sitting on these bed...
These bed...
Because sitting on this bed with these ancient sheets from...
1996? 7? I'm guessing?
Makes me feel nostalgic for an earlier point in my life.
And that's what this video is gonna be about.
Speaking of the past, the 1980s were really...
interesting.
I was born in the 90s, so my real love was the stuff I had access to,
like Pokémon and Power Rangers, you know, where they beat up cool monsters
and did fighting and there was explosions and giant robots.
It was a kid's dream.
And the music was so catchy that they've been reusing that same riff
in bits of music for the last, like, 25 years.
Oh, wow.
I've learned how to feel old.
But a secret fascination of mine was the 80s.
To me, they were like the dark times.
This period from before I was born and we had all of these ancient artifacts from it
that only I could make sense of.
The Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles and He-Man and the Transformers
weren't really for me.
They were for kids from a previous generation.
And luckily for me, thanks to VHS, a format that I've heard someone cool made a video about once,
I could re-watch these ancient stories from the before time over and over
without ever having to develop a personality.
Transformers in particular was really cool.
But then one day in Blockbusters,
and I only realize now how dated this video is going to be,
I saw a copy of a tape for The Transformers The Movie.
And that's weird because I thought movies were for adults and not kids
who watch their favorite stuff at 5 in the morning or however early I used to be able to wake up.
So I forced my dad to rent it and I spent a weekend watching it over and over
and storing all of its images in my brain for the rest of time.
There are some powerful images in that film which will never leave me.
I never learned an instrument.
["Turkish March"]
But in my adolescent and then later adult years,
I noticed that a lot of people my age or slightly older
didn't really remember the show in that much detail
but still remembered a lot of stuff from that movie and they might not have even seen it for decades.
And I've been curious for quite a while about how it ended up that way
so lately I re-watched some of the show and then the movie to try to figure out how to...
Actually, no.
I don't really have a justification for my life choices in such a clear-cut way like that.
To be honest, most of my videos are me hastily writing an introduction and a conclusion
to the bit that I just felt like making for no particular reason
and this time I just don't have one.
I'm going to talk about The Transformers show and the 1986 movie
for an amount of time and you can watch it if you'd like.
I'm gonna make that the thumbnail.
["Turkish March"]
Something I didn't really realize as a kid and probably should have done
is that The Transformers show is basically just a really explicit toy commercial.
I was really curious how a show could come to be like this
so I asked my father, Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov, how it came to be
and he told me it was all the fault of that capitalist pig dog, Reagan.
Ronald McDonald's Reagan was, of course, president of the United States for most of the 80s
and he famously hated regulation almost as much as he hated South American civilians.
I believe that prior to Reagan, broadcasters weren't allowed to do more than 12 minutes per hour of advertising
and, you know, a show which is basically selling a toy probably would have counted as advertising.
Reagan took office in 1981 and his FCC oversaw a complete overhaul of all these regulations,
putting the free market in charge of what children could see.
And as we know, Reagan's policies are beyond criticism.
My generation grew up being advertised to every waking moment of their entire lives
and all of us turned out fine.
And that allowed the creation of shows like My Little Pony, G.I. Joe, He-Man,
Mask, which I just remembered now while filming this bit,
and, yes, Silverhawks.
Partly metal, partly regal.
Ho-ho-ho-ho-ho!
I mean the Transformers.
These robots fight every episode and then at the end the status quo is usually restored
and maybe another robot turns up who can show off their amazing new abilities.
And it's in stores now.
And by now, I mean 30 years ago.
Oh my god.
I think the go-to example from this of the episodes I watched is the one called Bot.
Okay, there's this one robot called Bruticus who's like a big, really powerful robot.
He's way bigger than all the others because he's actually made of five smaller Decepticons
and they all team up and go,
BLEH!
He's the most powerful one.
He's just this utter destructive killing machine.
Anyway, in this episode, he gets shot once and completely falls apart.
Destroyed so completely that four of the five robots are just in bits, like, dead.
And there's only one survivor.
So getting completely obliterated and literally scrapped for parts
and the parts get put in other things.
They put the personality component in another robot for a while and, like, it runs off
and there's this really funny shot of it, like, diving through a window.
Anyway, so that can happen, but it's fine.
They just get rebuilt and they're totally okay.
There is no real death in this universe.
That's fine. I'm not asking for a children's show in which there's murder.
It's actually a really effective way of writing a show with a limited cast of characters.
It means that you can have people getting beat up, people get destroyed,
there are fights and people lose badly,
but they can be rebuilt so they can carry on going
so you don't have to continuously be churning out new characters.
It's also quite similar to how kids play with toys.
You know, when you're a kid and one of your toys dies in whatever thing you're playing,
you don't give it, like, a Viking funeral and then, like, you, like, bury it in the ground
because you can't use it anymore.
That's my secret strategy for winning in Warhammer.
I insist on giving every character of mine that gets killed a proper funeral with a eulogy.
After, like, the fifth one, my opponent always surrenders.
They never want to play with me again,
but I like to think it's because I taught them a harsh lesson about the horrors of war.
Basically, Transformers is the kind of story where no one can really die.
You—you get blown up, then they put you back together at the end of the episode,
and then you do it all again. It's that kind of show.
It's very comfy and easy to get into a rhythm, and you can watch a hundred episodes of it,
and it's not particularly challenging, but it doesn't have to be.
It's for kids.
And it's actually quite nice and relaxing to live in a universe where seemingly nobody can die.
Yeah, it's quite nice.
Anyway, in the opening of the Transformers movie, a planet gets destroyed and millions of people die.
...
Yeah, there's a—there's a bit of a tone difference in the movie.
♪
Like, we see an actual civilization full of people going about their everyday business.
There's even, like, malls and shopping centers.
And then we get to watch them get completely obliterated and devoured by this giant monster.
I don't really remember the movie being that different as a kid.
I remember the show being, like, really cool and kind of violent.
There was lasers and explosions.
But as an adult, the difference is, like, so clear and shocking.
Something is clearly very different from the previously consequence-free cartoon.
I—I mean, the episode where the guy gets blown up into tiny pieces and put back together
is the episode before the movie.
And it's, like, you go right from that to this!
Let's take a moment to talk about Unicron as a character.
Because, as a kid, he was the big bad guy robot of the movie.
But as an adult, I think Unicron represents something, actually stands in for something.
Um...
Nihilism?
Like, the Transformers universe has a god, according to its wiki.
He's called Primus. I think in some continuities, he's literally Cybertron.
And, you know, just hide—pretend to be a planet. It's a robot in disguise!
But, at least in the philosophical sense, Unicron is the closest thing we see in this universe to, like, a god.
Like, it's absolutely gigantic. It's incomprehensibly powerful.
It can destroy entire planets.
But what's interesting about it—not him, it—is it doesn't do it because it's evil or bad.
Maybe they change this in characterization later.
But in the film, it's very clear that it's eating.
This is how it feeds to survive.
It's this almost Lovecraftian thing.
It's so much bigger than us, and all it wants to do is eat.
And we just happen to be food on the planet it's eating.
And its insides are this bizarre and inscrutable seething mass of machines that just crunch and—and jitter and spark.
There was a negative review of the film in the LA Times by Charles Solomon,
which criticized, like, all aspects of the movie. He didn't really like it.
But he singles out Unicron, and I actually wrote this down.
Um...
The great animated villains, like the Wicked Queen in Disney's Snow White,
had motivations as compelling as any live-action character.
Unicron apparently destroys entire worlds because it has nothing else to do.
Now, personally, I think that's a kind of overly mechanistic way of looking at a film,
where you break down what the—what the motivation is,
and if the motivation isn't good according to some arbitrary standards, then it's bad.
Like, it's missing the forest for the trees by assuming a character has to be written a certain way to count as good.
For me, this criticism misses the actual terrifying thing about the character,
which is precisely that Unicron devours entire worlds because it has nothing else to do.
There's just something inevitable and huge about it.
It's this reminder that the universe is cold and senseless and will just kill you because it can.
And it's like, oh, I'm more scared of this movie now than when I was a baby.
The character Unicron most directly evokes,
and by evokes I mean ripped off, they definitely just stole it,
is Galactus from the Marvel Comics continuity universe thing.
Look out for him in Phase...12...point...5...movie...103?
Avengers...
The Return of Jafar.
Stan Lee and Jack Kirby came up with Galactus in 1966, way before Unicron.
Unicron's human form has horns that kind of resemble Galactus's headdress thing.
That might not be intentional, but I hope it was,
because the rest of the character was clearly taken from that as well.
Galactus is a invincible, or almost invincible, whatever,
godlike entity that eats planets to survive.
In an interview, Jack Kirby wrote this about Galactus.
Galactus is a sort of god.
He is beyond reproach, beyond anyone's opinion.
And this is kind of what I find interesting about Unicron.
Its life cycle just involves eating whole planets.
It's not got a moral compunction to do it.
It's just trying to survive, and it will genocide you.
Like, that's, like, a different kind of horror to the sorts of evil
that we normally think about in morality plays and children's media and stuff like that.
And Stan Lee said this about him.
Galactus was simply another in a long line of supervillains who we loved creating.
We felt the only way to top ourselves was to come up with an evildoer
who had almost godlike powers.
Therefore, the natural choice was sort of a demigod.
But now what would we do with him?
We didn't want to use the tired old cliche about him wanting to conquer the world.
There were enough would-be world conquerors in the Marvel Universe
and in all the other comic book galaxies.
That was when inspiration struck.
Why not have him not be a really evil person?
After all, a demigod should be beyond mere good and evil.
He'd just be, don't laugh, hungry.
And the nourishment he'd require is the life force and energy from living planets.
Now, the phrase,
beyond mere good and evil,
really sticks out to me here?
Not just because it's the name of a book by Friedrich Nietzsche,
like a work of philosophical aphorisms that are all about
dealing specifically with how we build the morality in the wake
of the discovery that our previous assumptions,
like that there was a god who guaranteed good and evil,
just didn't exist.
Like, boiling it down,
it's a book about how to build a philosophy in the wake of there not being a god.
Like, the exact themes that are being presented in this film.
But also because that same phrase is repeated again in the tagline of this movie.
It's even in the trailer.
Unicron, like Galactus, is really compelling
because, in its own cartoonish, for kids-y way,
it's dealing with actual moral and philosophical questions
about how we live in the universe?
Like, its very existence, its incursion into this ideological universe,
is this statement.
There is no divine plan,
you are all going to die,
you are tiny,
and the universe is gonna eat you.
The sort of,
ooh, I want Energon to fight a war so I can be in charge,
evil of Megatron,
is utterly fucking dwarfed
by the magnificent horror of this awful thing.
I even feel bad calling Unicron awful,
it's just, it just is.
Basically, Unicron is an absolutely awesome character,
and I really like it.
And this tone shift doesn't just involve the deaths of a bunch of never-before-seen alien robots.
In the beginning, Megatron and co. surprise attack an Autobot ship,
and all four of the robots on it, who are characters from the show,
just get murked.
They get Game of Thrones'd,
they just get killed, they die,
and then they take that ship,
and they take it to Autobot City,
and there's another big fight,
and, like, a bunch of them die.
The wiki has a special article just for it,
it's the Battle of Autobot City.
And there's just, like, a list of all the characters who died
in the first, like, ten minutes of this movie.
Prowl's death is especially shocking,
like, you see smoke emerge from his mouth and eyes and face
as he goes out, he's just dead.
This is a character from a show that you spent two seasons going,
well, it's okay, they get put back together, it's fine,
and he's just dead.
Megatron repeatedly shoots Optimus Prime in the chest,
and Prime haymakers him off the top of a building,
and he falls, like, multiple stories to the ground.
And they're both, like, fatally wounded and have to be dragged to safety.
And it's not like the show, where they get put back together,
Optimus Prime...
dies.
In the next scene, he gets this, like, deathbed goodbye.
And you watch the light fade from his eyes.
It's worth talking about why this was happening.
Hasbro were making some changes to the toy line,
and they thought, well, in the movie,
get rid of the old characters and introduce the new ones.
And there is something, like, still, even to me now,
genuinely quite sad about this scene,
especially after having just watched the show.
We had two seasons of silly cartoon fights of Megatron,
and this time they just murdered each other?
The father figure of the show is just gone,
and there isn't really anyone left to take his place.
And, like, that's really sad.
And this obviously had a massive impact on its audience.
Like, kids were crying in the theater and had to be dragged out.
There were tons of complaints.
Flint Dill has gone on the record as saying that, like,
he didn't really think it would have this kind of impact.
I'll get somebody saying,
how come you killed Optimus Prime?
I cried when you killed Optimus Prime.
But the real answer is that we, you know,
we didn't know that he was an icon.
As be- it was a toy show.
We just thought we were killing off the old product line,
introducing a new product.
And, you know, Optimus Prime was one of those guys.
They didn't think that they created, like, a cultural icon,
and, in a way,
I don't think they had created such an icon until they killed him.
And what makes it so impactful isn't just that people know the character.
If you had a scene like that for a character no one knew about,
it wouldn't be that interesting.
It's the specific juxtaposition of this
with the kind of immortal,
everything's fine, don't worry about it, nature of the show.
It just invented death in a universe where previously that couldn't happen,
and for a kid that's way, way more shocking than something you know just dying.
It's that specific contrast.
And I think this specifically is what makes the movie interesting,
and makes the movie and the show by relation
such a memorable pop cultural artifact.
It's this specific change they made,
which they didn't have to in the movie.
Like, in the show, as we explored, the story didn't really matter.
No one blinked an eye when everyone was dead for four million years.
Sometimes Megatron can fly.
Doesn't matter. It's fine. Don't worry about it.
All of a sudden, you do have to worry about it.
People can die now,
and that, to, like, a kid, is, like, a giant punch in the face.
It's like, oh god, there's a real world out there with consequences,
and I have to live in it.
For me, the introduction of Galactus and the death of Optimus Prime
are the actual beginning of the story of Transformers.
There are actual real big problems,
and not just these silly cartoony villains that you have to face.
There's this existential dread you have to somehow deal with,
and the people you look up to can go and just be gone,
and you might have to take their place,
or learn to make do in a world without them.
And how do you deal with that?
And all of a sudden, this silly show about space robots
has a meaningful story.
And I think that's why I find the Transformers movie so interesting,
and why I wanted to go back and think about it.
I didn't get a pet until I was a bit older,
so for me, like, the first time something that I knew about
and was kind of close to me died was the cartoon robot dad,
and the narrative of the movie actually explores
these really interesting questions and ideas
that you wouldn't expect to happen in the Transformers movie.
Questions like, how do you deal with the fact
that your existence is probably meaningless
and everyone you love can and will die?
These are, like, really important and difficult questions
that we as humans have been striving to try and answer
for hundreds if not thousands of years.
Like, that's basically all Friedrich Nietzsche did
until he, like, went mad and hugged a horse and died.
So ideally, the film would, in a perhaps kid-friendly way,
explore and maybe try and find some answers to these questions.
I said ideally there because it doesn't really.
Like, I've bigged this movie up a lot,
set up all the things about it that I like
and the interesting concepts that it kind of almost explores,
but the movie isn't very good.
Like, for all the bits in it that I like or think are really interesting,
there is a lot of bullshit.
There's loads of scenes of characters just faffing about
and saying one-liners that no one ever thought was cool.
Most egregious is the guy who talks really, really fast
because his thing is he moves really fast
and the little one that, like, talks in rhymes.
What about me, Magnus? What about me?
Mm-ha, mm-ha, mm-ha. I can help. I want to help.
What about me?
Friend, fine. Look behind.
You go wrong way. You fool, I say.
Absolutely, positively, definitely.
Nobody can get this job done faster than I can.
Nobody, nobody, nobody.
I've gone out of my way to not learn their names
because I want their existence to slide from my memory as quickly as possible.
If you think this film is actually good,
it's because you forgot about 75% of it.
But the 25% of stuff that's decent,
it actually deals with some really interesting stuff sometimes.
One scene I really quite like is when Unicron eats two of Cybertron's moons
and Bumblebee sets a bomb to detonate while it's being eaten by Unicron and they escape
and then it just isn't affected by the explosion at all
and they get sucked into Unicron and eaten and they're just gone for the rest of the movie
and you only found out that they didn't die, like, right at the end.
It isn't even dented!
Oh, shit! What are we gonna do now?
They actually said a swear in the children's film.
That's how bad things have got for the main characters.
I actually find this really compelling even as an adult.
Watching the characters see this horrible thing coming
and try to formulate a way of attacking it and getting away
and watching it just fail utterly and watch them get sucked in anyway,
it's, like, really cool.
And I think there's an important thematic thing there,
like, the characters are coping with the death of a lot of their friends
and even their leader, like, someone tremendously important to them,
and Unicron, if it represents nihilism or this understanding that life is meaningless,
in a really direct, literalized way,
the characters are trying to deal with and fail to deal with
this gnawing emptiness that tells them that life is pain.
And the whole movie is really about trying to escape the pull of these feelings
and do something with your life,
even though you know that at the end of it you die
and maybe all things don't really matter.
Like, the—the—the ultimate question of the film, basically,
is, oh, shit, what do we do now?
Like, even as an adult, I was kind of sucked in.
Like, what's gonna happen?
And the answer is… a lot of garbage.
–Nice, dino, good dino, sweet dino,
won't you step into the night spaceship,
and blow up pretty, please, pretty, pretty, pretty, please, nice dino.
–I'm trying to get them to the shuttle,
what's so magical?
–I'm gonna get on the dino, get on the dino, get on the dino!
–Oh, they're gonna mess about for a bit now,
Galvatron'll fly past and go,
ooh,
I'll get you.
Skrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr.
But I think we've established pretty successfully
what the questions of the movie are,
and that makes the scenes that are actually about that kind of cool
and interesting and cute
and stand out against the rubbish of the rest of the film.
There's a bit where Cup is telling this, like, old war story to the dinobots,
and they're all sitting around and listening,
and even Hot Rod's like,
why are you doing this?
What's the point of this?
We've got stuff to do.
And I find that scene actually really heartwarming and interesting.
Like, in the middle of this emotionally fraught situation
where bad stuff is happening and danger is present,
the character with the most knowledge and experience sits down and says,
let me tell you about another time it was bad.
And you realize, oh, wow,
when this movie's not just messing about,
it's actually just making a point here
about how, like, telling stories about other times when things were bad
helps us remember that things aren't actually bad all the time,
and there's lots of really good times
where life seems like it's worth living,
even if it ultimately isn't.
And you're like, oh.
There's, like, an interesting point here,
and it takes place in a scene
where a giant robot soldier is telling a bedtime story to a bunch of dinosaurs.
Like, in the context of the movie,
Unicron is really afraid of the Matrix of Leadership for some reason.
Like, it's the only thing that poses a threat to it.
And it's clear here what the Matrix of Leadership actually is.
It's all the stuff that the Autobots are doing to continue carrying on,
even when it seems pointless and like they can't win.
It's all the little things that actually constitute a morality.
That stuff is what allows the Autobots to carry on,
even when all of this bad stuff has happened.
And there's the specific thing that it's called the Matrix of Leadership,
and that begs the question of, like, what is leadership?
What was the je ne sais quoi that made Optimus Prime the cool guy?
And that's being explored here
in how the characters deal with this tough situation.
And what I find really interesting is that the guy who's picked as Prime's successor
is objectively really bad at the specific things required of leadership.
Like, Ultra Magnus even says in the scene, he's like,
But Prime, I'm—I'm just a soldier. I—I'm not worthy.
I am not a good successor to you.
I'm just a guy who's good at the thing that he does.
And he's right. Like, Ultra Magnus makes leadership decisions in the movie,
and they always are basically just concessions
to the Decepticons that actually make the situation worse.
Like, he pulls this clever trick where he lets most of his ship be blown up
so that, like, a little bit of it with them on it can escape,
and that buys them, like, five minutes of time in the movie.
And then after that, he creates a diversion so that the rest of his pals can escape,
which gives him and the Matrix to Galvatron.
Basically, just—he just loses.
He's just the highest-ranking guy.
He's not a conceptual leader-type figure.
He's not actually good at making the kind of high-concept decisions
a leader should make, whatever those may be.
I wonder if there's an answer to that question explored by the end of the story.
So that begs the ultimate questions.
What actually is leadership if it's not just being in charge?
And how do we make all of this work?
How do we make a positive change in a universe where it often seems hopeless?
And this gets explored on the other ship,
which also crash-lands, but on a different planet.
The one with Hot Rod and Cup and the Dinobots on it.
So they encounter these piranha-like, Transformer-ish robots,
and Cup's like,
We shouldn't fight them.
Let's do the universal greeting.
Don't act hostile.
I'll use the universal greeting.
Universal greeting?
Oh, we're going with this?
Bah-weep-grah-nah-weep-needy-bon.
Bah-weep-grah-nah-weep-needy-bon.
What I find interesting about this is the sheer friction
between the concept being explored and the way it's being explored.
Like, the idea of, in this vast universe with multiple different languages
and levels of intellect and consciousness,
the idea that there is a universal phrase
which to anyone means vaguely,
Hi, I'm your friend,
is, like, super fascinating.
Like, the idea of a universe where there is this central,
conceptual meaning and a way of communicating,
like, that's a thing.
And it's being explored by the robot saying,
Weep-a-boop-a-baaah.
Bah-weep-grah-nah-weep-needy-bon.
See? The universal greeting works every time.
Bah-weep-boop-
I can't even be bothered to remember it.
It's so embarrassing and obnoxious,
and it just still makes me cringe.
And even as a kid, I was like,
Oh, no, I hope no one's watching me watching this.
I just, oh, God.
And it doesn't even work either.
They give them the candy, the laser candy,
and they run out and they just capture them anyway.
It doesn't work.
And this is another, like, cool way
that they juxtapose the reality of the story
with the kind of silliness of the cartoon.
They're like, no, this is real.
That childish nonsense doesn't work here.
You've got to be realistic.
You should have slaughtered those other sentient beings.
So they escape, they get on a ship,
and they go to pick up the other Autobots, right?
And then they have a repeat
of the last encounter they just had.
Like, they meet this new alien species
that might be possibly hostile,
and this time Kup's like,
let's just fucking shoot them.
We got them.
And then we get the point of the movie.
We get the moral core, the thesis of the film,
and it is simultaneously the silliest thing ever,
the worst, stupidest, most baddest scene ever,
and also amazing.
So Kup's gonna shoot them, right?
And Hot Rod goes,
no, I've discovered the moral core of the movie.
Let's do the universal greeting again.
What was that universal greeting again?
Never mind, I remember.
Ba-weep-gra-na-weep-nini-bong.
And they do it.
Ba-weep-gra-na-weep-nini-bong.
Ba-weep-gra-na-weep-nini-bong.
And it works.
Ba-weep-gra-na-weep-nini-bong.
And everyone's happy,
and they form like a circle around them,
and they do a big dance,
and everyone's their friend.
And then you're like, oh shit,
the movie's actually making a point here
with this incredibly childish thing.
The point is the childishness.
Like, the movie has just positioned
the naive and childish desire
to try to make friends in spite of everything
as the actual radical positive moral choice
to save the universe.
Where you try the thing,
even though the world has told you
it won't work and it'll be bad,
just in case it might.
Just in case you might actually be able
to unite with these other people.
And sometimes it works.
Despite appearing on the surface
to be a deeply cynical movie,
what it's actually doing is setting up
all the really good reasons
that you should be cynical about the world
and your place in it,
and then saying,
no, it's actually really good
to be a bit naive sometimes.
And maybe that's the thing.
Maybe that's the miraculous way
that we build a morality in this universe.
We, perhaps in a somewhat silly way,
assert that this does matter
and everything can work,
even if it doesn't seem like it.
And this is the film answering the question
of what is leadership.
Hot Rods goes,
no, let's not do the tactically clever thing.
Let's be unrealistic.
Let's believe that a peaceful,
mutually beneficial outcome is possible,
and we can actually all get on
and have this peaceful encounter.
And it seems like an unrealistic and silly thing,
but someone there asserting
that they believe it is possible
causes it to happen.
And that is an actual philosophical statement
about how to live in the world,
to insist, if not demand,
that better things are possible,
even when it specifically doesn't seem possible at all.
Literally this scene,
where all of a sudden
there's an answer to the darkness of the universe,
the song that plays over the scene
is Weird Al Yankovic's Dare to be Stupid.
["Dare to be Stupid"]
And that's literally the moral core of the film.
You have to dare to be stupid.
You have to believe in the incredibly silly, idyllic thing.
Ultra Magnus and the other robots
immediately get, like, forlorn,
and they want to be cynical again,
and Hunter says,
no, don't think about it in terms of
whether or not we have the MacGuffin.
Think about it in terms of
what we can do now to make it work.
You know, there's this old thing
that a philosopher guy said once.
A leader isn't someone who tells you what to do
and you obey because he's in a position of power over you.
A leader is someone who talks
and then you realize you believe them
and you want that thing to happen as well.
And that great philosopher's name was Optimus Prime,
and I find this sort of positivity
radically reshapes the universe thing
happening as well with Unicron.
Like, Galvatron tries to use the Matrix
and he doesn't really know how to understand it,
but he does use it in some capacity
because it suddenly causes Unicron
to transform and unfold
and you actually get the coolest scene in the movie,
this really awesome transformation sequence
where he unfolds and moves and shifts
and it's got some of the best music ever.
Like, I've listened to the Unicron theme medley
like 1,500 times in my life over the last decade.
It's just incredible.
Just Unicron's theme in general
is just this epic thing
where it's a mix of synthesizers and drums
and there's like this industrial hissing
and it's just...
I realize that almost all of my musical interests
spring forth in some fashion
from the soundscape of the various iterations
of the Unicron theme in the movie.
It's also, like, really, really cool
that the best scene in the movie
is literally just a scene of something transforming.
It's just, this is literally the film
and it's really cool. I love it.
But this scene is also a continuation
of the themes of the story.
Like, we've just seen that the assertion
that things can be made better
allows the impossible to happen.
People who would have been your enemies
if you'd approached them differently
are suddenly your friends
and with the mere application of the belief
that something can be done about Unicron,
all of a sudden Unicron becomes a comprehensible threat.
Unicron becomes mortal in response to Galvatron
trying to use the Matrix against him
and I find that super interesting.
Like, that's literally the themes of the film.
If you believe something can be done,
all of a sudden maybe it actually can be.
So Hot Rod crashes his ship
right through Unicron's eye
and, like, all of a sudden
this basically god-like creature
that eats planets and can't be harmed
by massive moon-sized explosions
and can suck people in
even when they're trying to escape,
all of a sudden he's, like, gasping in pain.
He goes,
"[screams in pain, laughs evilly"]
And his eye, because it's been smashed apart
and the crash is timed
with the first line of Stan Bush's song,
"'Dare.'"
["Dare!" by Stan Bush plays in the background.]
Where, again, it's the thing about daring, again.
It's, like, daring is, by definition,
believing in something
which it's not realistic to believe.
And this isn't just a ridiculous 80s rock anthem
about generic positivity
playing over a toy commercial film.
I mean, it is that,
but in addition,
it's a really interesting declaration
that doing the supposedly clever thing,
the realistic thing,
isn't really enough.
Sometimes you have to demand the impossible.
One last scene that I really, really like
is the bit between Galvatron and Hot Rod
when they're fighting
and Galvatron's like,
"'We should probably just come out and be killed by me.
I mean, we're all gonna die, right?'
["Come out, Autobot!
We all must die sometime!"
And Hot Rod goes,
"'No!'
and punches him.
"'Not today, Galvatron!'
And that exchange sums up the whole movie.
You know, the universe is dark and scary,
and maybe your life is meaningless,
and maybe we're all just sitting around waiting to die.
We're all just running out the biological clock,
but we're not gonna die today,
and things can be made better.
And this approach is what causes the Matrix
to finally activate and get all glowy and stuff,
and he's like,
"'I have the power!'
That's a different show.
I know it's a different show.
I was making a reference.
Stan Bush's The Touch starts playing,
and he gets all glowy,
and he transforms.
He evolves, and he doesn't hit B,
so it's permanent,
and he transforms into...
Rodimus Prime.
["Arise, Rodimus Prime!"
["Optimus!"
Come on, you almost let me use you
to make a really interesting point movie,
and then the main character's apotheosis
is to transform into someone called Rodimus Prime.
He's just, oh, there's a reason no one's taken this movie seriously
for 30 years.
Oh!"
And then he holds up the Matrix,
and Unicron explodes.
The power of leadership and hope
and unwarranted positivity in a dark universe
has successfully vanquished the pessimistic nihilism
that encroaches upon us all
when bad things happen in our lives.
Rodimus Prime discovered the magic of Xanax.
Rodimus Prime makes a speech about how, like,
now we're going to live in a world of peace
where everyone can be a part of this beautiful new world.
Just this ridiculously optimistic speech.
["We march forward to a new age of peace and happiness
till all are one!"
And it's like, yeah,
and then Unicron's head flies past,
and that's the end.
It just ends on that speech with the music playing
just like that.
We beat you.
Let's all live in peace and happiness forever.
Done.
Credits.
Go.
Just have a nice day, everyone.
I love it.
So yeah, it's not really that great a movie,
and the scenes that stand out,
especially to the kids who remembered it
from the time they first saw it,
they stand out usually because it was busy killing
a character that was well-known and important to you.
Like, it wasn't impactful because it was good.
It was impactful because it was horrifying
in, like, a really terrible way for a kid.
It didn't really stand out because of its quality.
Like, I find that I keep every couple of years
coming back to this movie in some form.
This movie is unmistakably a kind of standard
hero's journey transition into adulthood thing for Hot Rod.
Growing up, I appreciate that far more
because, like, I and a lot of the kids who watch this movie
have had to mature into adults
and encounter some of the emotions
that were first brought up for some kids in this film.
A lot of people have had to deal with the death of a parent
or someone really close to them and learn to cope with that.
And it's hard not to, in that process,
look back on a movie that is kind of about
dealing with those things.
Like, in a way, the Transformers movie
is more meaningful to adults now
than it ever could have been for kids then.
I think I find myself coming back to this movie
because I never feel like I'm quite done thinking about it
because its meaning keeps changing for me
as I keep changing as a person.
I, as a person, have grown up and changed a lot
in the last 10, 15, 20 years of my life.
A lot of things in the world have changed
and, in a way, one of the ways that you learn to deal with it
and fully appreciate those things
is you go back to something that you felt you knew
and look at it with the benefit of the new site that you have.
And I find that I keep doing this
with the Transformers movie in particular.
Like, five years ago, when I was just really into
how clever I thought I was,
I used to write for this website called smugfilm.com.
Like, that was supposed to be a joke.
Like, haha, we know how silly this looks.
But really, no, everyone on that site was pretty smug,
especially me.
And five years ago now, in 2014,
I wrote a piece about how the Transformers movie
is actually about the Nietzschean ideal.
How it's this, like, radical rebuttal to philosophical nihilism.
Like, that was incredibly silly.
But there was a time in my life
where I genuinely felt that way about the film
and felt that way about how to think about the world.
And one of the ways that I allowed myself to develop
was by reinvestigating what I had previously thought of
as just this fun movie that I thought was cool when I was a kid.
Like, in a way, it's only through nostalgia
that we understand the present
by fully accepting how we used to see something.
Don't read that article, by the way.
It's really not that great.
In fact, I still have some beef with the guy who ran the site.
He would edit the articles to be what he thought sounded better
and he would cut a bunch of the words out.
Like, I remember my original article being, like, twice as long
and he, like, cut out all my favorite bits and reworded some of it
and it just, I don't know, it just kind of annoyed me.
Don't read the old article, anyway.
It was bad before.
It was bad before it was edited.
We are all, in a very specific sense,
undergoing this eternal and never truly finished transformation.
We're always becoming something else
and this is one of the ways that we come to understand who we are now
is by looking at the things from our past with the new lens that we have
and, like, that, I think, is the value of nostalgia.
You have the ability to look back not just on something from the past
but on how you were in the past.
I think a lot of people are nostalgic for movies
not because there's something particularly great
about living in the 80s or something
but because being a kid in the 80s
when the worst thing that could possibly happen to you that day
was the cartoon dad robot died.
Like, that is a really nice time to be alive
that we all kind of, on some level, do appreciate more now that we don't have it.
We're coming up on, like, in a couple of months,
the 10-year anniversary of Lindsay Ellis's video about the Transformers movie.
She hates it.
She thinks it's terrible.
Like, 10 years.
I wasn't joking earlier in the video where I talked about how old I felt.
Like, in a way, this video is, like, a very brief midlife crisis for me
where I look back on how I used to think about some stuff
and my old YouTube videos and the things I used to do
and try and figure out where I've changed
and where I'm going and what I'm supposed to do
and I think the reason why I turn back to Transformers
is because it shouts the loudest and clearest,
the most valuable message for someone in that state,
which is demand the impossible.
Believe that it can be better even if it doesn't seem that way
and that's how finding the way out becomes possible
and I guess I never really stopped believing in the silly cartoon.
I just find better and better ways to intellectualize it.
For the first time in my life, I feel old.
I've felt like I was 19 until I was 26
and now I feel like an old person
and it's made me go,
well, who am I?
And looking back on all my old videos, it makes me think,
wow, I thought this was funny
and maybe I miss having that much future ahead of me
but it makes me happy to be who I am now.
It's fun realizing that while the past had its benefits,
the present and the future are pretty cool too.
This movie is a part of my process of thinking about life and the world
so it's been fun using it as an excuse to talk about these ideas now.
So, yeah, thanks for tuning in to my midlife crisis.
It's over now. I feel good again.
Thank you very much to the people who support me doing this
because I literally, literally couldn't be here doing this without you.
So for me now, the Transformers movie is unavoidably
about dealing with having to mature into a world
where no one really knows what's going on
and you have to somehow figure it out for yourself
and that makes the movie interesting to me even now,
even though it's measurably bad.
I guess the movie was more than meets the eye.
Oh my god.
