Many teachers have a poor work-life balance.
I know because I've had years of experience as a teacher in the classroom.
I'm here to teach you how to handle your workload and restore that work-life
balance.
If you follow my time management methods, long days should be a thing of the past.
You'll be able to go home on time, worry-free, knowing that you've done
everything you need to do.
Let's begin. One of the biggest challenges you face as a teacher
is your uncooperative co-workers, your students. Sometimes they try and do as
little work as possible
and it can be tempting to let them get away with it. After all, if some of them
don't do their homework,
that's less homework for you to mark. Small problems like this, such as letting
an individual student get away with not doing homework or a project,
can quickly grow into big problems, like the entire class not doing their
homework.
Ultimately, if the students aren't doing the work you're assigning them, they're going to
do less well on the tests
and they're learning less. You also have to spend more and more time in your day
dealing with classroom management issues,
like trying to get them to do their work. The students don't learn just what you
teach them directly, they're also learning about you as a person.
If you're the kind of teacher who lets homework slide, they're going to be less
and less likely to do work for you and to respect you.
You have to make sure that you're keeping track of everything that's going
on in your classroom.
But this is quite a challenge, because oftentimes teachers have 500 or more
students that they need to be looking after.
How do you make sure that you're keeping track of what everybody owes you and what
needs to be done?
The tool that I recommend that can change your life is just a small, sturdy
clipboard. If you go out and you get one for yourself today, I guarantee you it'll
change your life as a teacher.
There are three kinds of things that you should keep on your clipboard.
There are tracking sheets, there are daily must-do lists, and there's a general to-do list.
I want to talk about the tracking sheet first.
The tracking sheet starts out its life as just a plain piece of blank paper.
But as the days go by, if any student misses something for you,
a homework or a project, you put their name on this list,
make a note of what the thing is that they're missing, and the date that this
happened on.
You should go through this list at least once a week and cross off anybody who's
gotten work back to you,
or send messages to those who haven't. If a student continues not to give
something to you,
you need to look into your own school sanctions policies. As long as you never
cross off anybody's name before they've given you what they owe you,
you'll always be making sure that you get every piece of work from every student.
When collecting in the homework from students, you should go around to the
student's desk
individually, collect each piece of homework, and then write down the names
of those who don't have it.
If you do this regularly, the students will quickly learn that you're the kind of
teacher who doesn't let things slide,
and they'll put you on the top of their own to-do lists. The second thing to talk
about
are the daily must-do lists. On your computer,
you should make a Word document that has a blank page for each work day.
On those pages, you're going to put down the things that must happen by the end of
that day
in order to be fully prepared for the next day. So as an example,
every Monday you need to list all of the classes that you need to plan for on
Tuesday.
If there's anything else that needs to be done before Tuesday, also put that on
that list.
The thing that really makes this work is that it is a must-do list.
This is not a daily to-do list. You're not putting down things that you would
like to get done by the end of the day, but that are ultimately optional.
You need to put down things that have to get done. I like to think of this as my
I must do this before I can go home list. If you limit your list to only the
things that absolutely have to get done,
it's much more motivating to knock those things off so you know you can go home
at the end of the day and not have to be worrying all night about what you need
to do first thing in the morning to be ready for the day.
The last thing to keep on the clipboard is a general to-do list.
This is a list for everything that doesn't fit on your must-do lists.
Anything that is less time-sensitive goes on here.
Any general project that you need to do at some point, but not by a specific day,
will all be kept track of on here. After you've crossed off your must-do list,
then you would turn over to your general to-do list and start working through
those items if you have time.
The next thing I want to talk about is paperwork. Teachers deal with a lot of
paper and you have to have a system for keeping it all together.
This is what I recommend. You should have one folder for each class that you teach.
Within that folder, you're going to keep all of the papers that you currently need
to teach that class. So, any worksheets that you're going to give out,
any tests you're going to give out, homework that you've gotten back and need
to mark, all of those kinds of things go into this folder.
Any reference materials that you wouldn't need on a particular day to teach that
class, such as workbooks that you use to photocopy the worksheets from,
those you can keep in a separate filing cabinet. Here's an example of the kind
of thing to keep inside one of the folders.
This is a collection of papers that's for a year 10 test. There's three parts to
this little packet, so let's take a look at them. First, there's the papers
themselves. Secondly, there's a title sheet that clearly describes what they
are, in this example, year 10 tests. And lastly, there's a cover slip which keeps
all of these things together. If you leave a lot of blank space in your cover
sheet, you can add additional information later on, such as when you've given the
test to the students and received them back, you can add to mark on the front of
that sheet so that you know you need to take care of this. And once you've marked
them, you can then cross that out. Again, to quickly review, keep one folder for
each of your classes, and keep all of the things that you need to teach that class
in that folder. Once you set up the system, you know that you just need that
single folder to be adequately prepared for the class. This is also convenient in
case there's a room change. You can just grab that folder and go. If you're able to
organize your files in the way that I've just recommended, and you're able to
consistently work with your daily must-do list, the advantage is that when you walk
into school on any day, you know that you're completely ready for whatever's
going to happen. You don't have to spend any of your day frantically planning for
that afternoon lesson, and if anything comes up unexpectedly, you don't have to
worry about it, because you're all set for every one of your lessons for that
day. Once you start getting used to this ready position, you'll find that you have
more time in the day than you actually originally thought. One of the places that
time has been hiding from you is in these little five-minute intervals between
lessons. After the last class leaves and before the next class comes in, you can
use this time in a productive way if you're prepared adequately. I recommend
that you keep a list of things that you can do in these little five-minute times.
For example, you can do some quick filing, or if you have an easy-to-mark quiz, you
can mark a couple of pages in that quiz. After a full day of teaching, you can
sometimes find that you've marked a complete class set of quizzes without
ever feeling like you had to sit down and mark the whole thing at once. I want
you to realize as a teacher that your job is a lot less clear than other jobs.
If you think of a factory worker, they have a clearly defined shift, which is
nine to five, and they're producing a tangible product such as a car. You know
when the car is done because all of the pieces have been fit together. Being a
teacher is not like this. If you're working on something like making
presentations or making a test for a class or a worksheet, this kind of work
can really go on forever. You can always make a presentation a little bit snappier
or you can always make a worksheet a little bit clearer. When you're making
something like a worksheet, at some point the worksheet is going to be serviceable.
It's going to be completely adequate for the educational aim that you're trying
to achieve. If you're going to continue working, you really need to stop and
think for a moment. Would I better spend my time making this worksheet absolutely
perfect or would my time be better spent moving on to something else? Most of the
time the answer is the latter. You're better off having two satisfactory
worksheets for two different classes than one perfect worksheet for one class
but no worksheet for the other one. Now let's talk about sick days. Teachers have
one of the lowest absentee rates of any profession and I don't think that's
because teachers are more healthy than most people. It's because as a teacher
sometimes missing a day of work is more of a hassle than just going in no matter
how poorly you may be feeling. Because of this, teachers don't often take days off
work until they're feeling really poor. Do yourself a favor as a teacher. Spend
some time creating lessons to be used in your absence ahead of time. If you make
them before you need them, when you actually are sick, you can just call in
the school and tell them. There's a file in my filing cabinet, it's called cover
work. Everything you need is in there and you can hang up the phone, crawl back
into bed, and spend your day getting better as opposed to spending your day
worrying about what your students are actually going to do. The last thing I
want to talk about is how big projects get done. Something like a cathedral
doesn't just pop into existence. It gets built very slowly over time one brick by
one brick. It's a good idea to try and carve out at least 20 minutes maybe 30
minutes every day to work on a long-term project that's beneficial to you and
your career. For example, if there's a new computer skill that you need to
learn, if you just spend 20 minutes a day on it, you can make real progress on
something like that over time. If you set aside daily time to work on your
long-term projects, you'll be pleasantly surprised by how much you can accomplish.
When you look back in six months or a year, you'll be amazed at what you've
done. And lastly, don't forget why it is you became a teacher in the first place,
the summer holidays.
