Contrary to the media narrative, COVID-19 treatment with hydroxychloroquine is a safe
and generic...
Whoa, before people start reaching for the fish tank cleaner and YouTube blocks this
video, let me jump in quickly and say that this is crap.
So don't take medical advice from television pundits on Sky News.
I'm going to look at the rise and fall of a therapy that was passionately championed
in some sections of the media and the dangers of mixing politics and medicine.
I'm going to look at the scientific reasons why hydroxychloroquine hasn't been approved
by the FDA, the Therapeutics Goods Administration of Australia, the PFSB of Japan, and just
about every major pharmaceutical authority in Europe except, I think, for Italy.
Is this because Donald Trump has spoken in favour of it, do you reckon?
No, Alan, it's because nearly every study that's been done shows that hydroxychloroquine
isn't an effective treatment.
That may be hard to fathom if you ignore most of the science and only have a flawed,
narrow and selective understanding of the research.
In a new study, Smith and three other medical experts prove what he and his This Show have
been telling you for more than a year, that hydroxychloroquine can save lives.
But this wasn't a published clinical study or a randomized trial.
It was an observational study made by a group of doctors that was posted online.
There certainly have been a few studies that found hydroxychloroquine might be beneficial,
like this study by Achad et al. published in May 2020.
But for all the hype it was given in some sections of the media, you wouldn't know that
it was not a randomized control study and that it had a caveat.
Well, a new hydroxychloroquine study has just dropped and it could have all those experts
eating their words.
The Henry Ford Health System in Michigan tonight is announcing that hydroxychloroquine significantly
reduced death rates among sick and hospitalized COVID patients.
No, it didn't say that at all.
What it actually concluded was that treatment with hydroxychloroquine alone and in combination
with azithromycin was associated with a reduction in COVID-19-associated mortality.
An association is not the same as cause and effect.
For that, the study recommends prospective trials.
And these were done.
When taken in their totality, rather than picking just one or two for a TV program,
they show that hydroxychloroquine is ineffective.
This review found no benefit on viral clearance but a significant increase in mortality.
All these studies can be found in the review linked in the video description, as are my
other sources, so you can check all these studies yourselves.
And this review of studies looking at hydroxychloroquine as a prophylaxis also found that it was ineffective.
The key message from completed studies and randomized control trials seems to be that
hydroxychloroquine does not work.
An editorial in the Journal of the American Medical Association also summarized the findings
of all the studies.
These well-conducted trials, it said, including the study reported in this issue of JAMA,
demonstrate the lack of efficacy of hydroxychloroquine in patients with COVID-19.
They have been ignored by many TV pundits in favour of trumpeting just a few selected
studies that supposedly prove the pundits are right.
They see science, as they always do, as a battle between teams, or political sides.
And that meant anyone who said hydroxychloroquine was not safe and effective for COVID-19 must
be on the opposite team.
Never mind about randomized control trials and meta-analysis and statistically significant
mortality and all that sciencey stuff.
In the end, this is a lot easier to understand than this.
So when Alan Jones asked the question…
Is this because Donald Trump has spoken in favour of it, do you reckon?
He didn't turn to a knowledgeable researcher who could explain all this research to him.
He asked someone on his team, a member of the Australian Parliament with no scientific
expertise at all.
It's ironic that the people who claim that politics is interfering with scientific decisions
are the ones who consistently ignore the conclusions of qualified scientific researchers in favour
of seeking out answers from politicians.
So that brings us on to the next, very reasonable argument.
Hydroxychloroquine may not help, but surely it won't hurt.
After all, there's anecdotal evidence, so why not give it anyway?
That was the view of many people who responded to my video Coronavirus vs Politics.
Sure, no need to convince me.
Of course it's been around for a long time to treat malaria, lupus and rheumatoid arthritis.
But Covid-19 treatment with hydroxychloroquine is a safe and generic medication?
Yes, for treating malaria, lupus and rheumatoid arthritis, not for treating Covid-19.
There are many studies of hydroxychloroquine's effects and they are all in agreement that
if it's taken in the right doses, it's safe.
There is no reason to believe why somebody having the coronavirus would change this fact.
Actually, there is a reason to believe that if the coronavirus manifests itself as Covid-19.
The next poster inadvertently stumbled on the answer.
The safety and side effects of chloroquine are well understood and the mechanism of action
is well understood.
Indeed, the side effects of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are well understood and
that's why it's a problem for Covid-19 patients.
To find out why, first I have to explain something called the QT interval.
It's the period of time between the end of the heart's atrial contraction and the end
of its ventricular contraction, this part of the heart's cycle.
The interval, shown here by the peaks labelled Q and T, is called the QT interval.
In a normal heart it looks like this.
But medical researchers have known for a long time that hydroxychloroquine has an adverse
effect on the heart's rhythm by lengthening the QT interval.
This has been the subject of discussion and published research long before SARS-CoV-2
came along.
But unless a patient has existing heart problems, and most patients with malaria, lupus and
rheumatoid arthritis don't, then the adverse effects are outweighed by the benefits.
The problem is, a lot of Covid patients do often have heart problems is one of the complications
of Covid-19.
So pretty early on, several studies focused on whether this might be aggravated by the
use of hydroxychloroquine.
Some studies found it did, some found that it didn't.
Some even found a statistically significant increase in the number of deaths.
So no, the studies are not in agreement that hydroxychloroquine is safe for Covid-19, even
in the right doses.
In case you think there's something political about the QT cycle, I should point out that
hydroxychloroquine upsets the cardiac cycle whether you're a Republican or a Democrat.
But try telling that to members of the team.
There was a lot of fear.
I mean, obviously there was strange political reasons that I'll never understand.
When I recommend something, they like to say don't use it.
OK, well there's one last piece of the puzzle that shows this has nothing to do with party
politics.
We want the FDA to issue an emergency use authorization for Remdesivir.
We would like to see very quick approvals, especially with things at work.
And Remdesivir has been approved by health authorities all over the world, including
the United States.
It's widely used as a therapy.
The president also endorsed this treatment.
Within a very short period of time, they gave me Regeneron.
And Regeneron has been approved for emergency use in treating Covid-19, and that authorization
is being expanded as trials continue.
And of course, there's the vaccine.
And the vaccine looks like it's really heading in a very rapid direction, a very positive
direction.
No need to tell you that that has been approved and widely adopted.
So the common denominator is not whether the president spoke in favour of a particular
therapy, but whether clinical trials showed that the medication was effective and reasonably
safe.
As so often happens, eventually the pundits have no choice but to catch up with the science.
So after 18 months of bombshell reports that prove hydroxychloroquine works, most opinion
makers have now quietly stopped promoting it.
So it's not the researchers who are eating their word, but the amateurs who play doctor
on TV.
At least it would be if they could bring themselves to issue a correction or an apology.
But of course, there hasn't been any.
The promotion has just been quietly dropped.
Sky News, which once cried censorship and cancel culture when YouTube removed its misleading
videos on hydroxychloroquine, ended up removing the videos itself from its own website, including
this one.
It just takes these people a little longer to catch up with the rest of us.
Now another drug, ivermectin, is being touted as the latest miracle cure that the authorities
don't want you to know about.
A lot of studies have been done on ivermectin, and as always it's the positive ones that
are selected and promoted.
But the quality of some of these studies is questionable.
Many of the amateurs supported their case for ivermectin by citing a preprint, in other
words a study that hadn't been peer reviewed that was later found to be fraudulent and
withdrawn from publication.
That's bad enough, but it gets worse.
That study was so large that it became an important component of meta-analyses also
touted by amateur pundits, as proof that ivermectin works.
Another study touted by the gurus seemed too good to be true – a 100% success rate.
The lead author was Hector Cavallo.
But medical professionals and journalists have found a number of discrepancies in the
study.
There were contradictions in the number of participants given in the paper and submitted
to an official clinical trials database.
Some of the numbers don't even add up.
I mean literally they don't equal the totals at the bottom of the table.
A hospital named in the paper announced that it had no record of the study and its name
had to be removed from the paper.
It was replaced with a vague reference to Other Peripheral Medical Centre, which remains
unnamed.
A doctor, whom the lead author said had helped review the data, denied having anything to
do with the study.
Why wasn't any of this picked up in peer review?
Perhaps because this study was published in an open access journal that isn't on the
master journals list, in other words little better than a website, and there were only
seven days between submission and acceptance.
I have to point out that the case of ivermectin is not yet a carbon copy of what happened
with hydroxychloroquine.
I can't proclaim that ivermectin works or doesn't work as a treatment or a prophylaxis.
What's wrong with me?
Why can't I pick a team?
Because that's not how science works.
The efficacy of ivermectin is dependent on evidence and professional medical bodies,
including the company that discovered and markets the drug, have determined that the
evidence is still lacking.
They say studies done so far have been small-scale, inadequate and contradictory.
What's needed is a proper large-scale, randomised control trial, and this is now being undertaken
by Oxford University.
But it's unfortunate that such tentative data are being used to not only promote ivermectin
on mainstream and social media, but to proclaim that if it's as effective as its proponents
hope, and they're often preaching that hope as a fact, then it makes the vaccine unnecessary.
And that has real-life consequences for people who take these pronouncements on faith.
But this video isn't about ivermectin, and it isn't even about hydroxychloroquine.
It's about how science has been co-opted by the self-professed gurus who make these recommendations
and the blind faith of people who believe them.
The crucial question on these miracle drugs isn't a political one, but a medical one.
Should health experts authorise a drug that they know could cause patients to die and
is most likely ineffective when other therapies that are effective are readily available?
Imagine if they had authorised hydroxychloroquine, despite knowing that studies showed it was
ineffective and a danger to patients.
Now that would be a real conspiracy, and I wonder who would be the first to express
outrage at that.
Careful what you wish for, Laura.
Thank you.
