Vegas, baby, it's Paradise.
Not metaphorically either, this literally isn't the city of Las Vegas.
Look at a map and you'll see the name Paradise and when you visit and check the weather,
same thing.
Here is Las Vegas and here is Paradise which contains nearly everything people associate
with Las Vegas, including the sign.
Now you might think Paradise is just a relatively unknown city mistaken for its larger neighbor
like elsewhere, but Paradise isn't a city at all.
It's an unincorporated place.
Just that, quick government recap.
Citizens living in a city have to follow the rules of the city and also those of the county
and also the state and also the nation.
It's a government layer cake.
And each layer collects its own taxes to enforce its own rules.
If some folk find these layers oppressive, they can hitch their wagons and head for open
lands outside the borders of any city to live like the rugged individualists they are, free
of rules.
Well, except for those of the nation and also the state and also the county.
But moving outside a city, there's one fewer and also layer because they are in an unincorporated
place.
But if they make it nice and the population grows, inevitably people want police and sewers
and schools and rules and soon a charter is written, a mayor elected and a city incorporated.
What makes Paradise weird is that unlike most unincorporated places that contain mostly
blowing tumbleweeds and perhaps a yurt where nobody wants to live, there are almost a quarter
million residents in Paradise in a space the size of Disney World.
That density is way past the point you'd expect people to incorporate a city and it's not
like Paradisians just couldn't bother.
Paradise is almost unique in being officially unincorporated.
So why?
It started with the Mormons who first settled these lands in the 1880s.
Actually no, jump cut to 1950 when we still tested out nuclear bombs in the open near
population centers.
Nevada recently legalized gambling and a casino empire grew in Vegas, well just outside of
it to avoid city taxes.
As for necessary services, the casinos were rich enough to provide their own, notably
using their security forces as de facto police.
Which might not sound on the up and up but this was the mob running things and of course
they don't anymore.
Actually really they don't, it's all run by about two companies now.
Anyway, the official city of Las Vegas in the 1950s was on the verge of bankruptcy and
with profitable casinos touching its border, the mayor was all like, who are you kidding?
This is totally part of Las Vegas because I say so and you're going to pay Las Vegas
taxes.
The casinos said no.
It was a dispute that only the county, the next level of government up, could resolve.
The casinos by the way paid taxes to the county direct.
So shockingly the county told Vegas, no you can't annex this land and tax its businesses
just because you want to.
But to prevent Vegas from trying anything funny in the future, the county created the
officially, unofficially incorporated place named Paradise.
Everything that happens within its borders the actual city of Las Vegas has no control
over.
Here the county rules and sets lower taxes of all sorts which is why when new casinos
are built it's generally in Paradise, not Las Vegas.
But if this makes you think that the origin of Paradise was just some kind of city size
tax dodge, you're right.
Now, before you go around correcting everybody that your vacation was in Paradise, not Las
Vegas, Las Vegas City and Paradise are both in Las Vegas Valley.
So you can say you went to Las Vegas while never setting foot in Las Vegas and still
be technically correct that you went to Las Vegas.
