Hello, internet. Well, here we are. One decade later.
Ten years? Now you've got YouTube tenure. I wish that was how it worked, but it is not.
Has it felt like ten years? No, YouTube still feels like my new job, even though I've put
in almost twice as many YouTube years as teaching years at this point. What can I say? Brains
are weird.
Can we get a lava lamp on the desk, please? Sure. Actually, back when I was a teacher
I always kept a lava lamp on the desk for students, because when I was a student I always
found it easier to listen and to think without also having to make eye contact the whole
time, but you'd get chastised for looking up at the ceiling. Hey, pay attention, kid.
But I was paying attention. Look at me, in the eyes, all day long. Not fun. I figured
I couldn't be the only one like that, so I didn't correct kids for looking away from
me. But also, ceiling gets boring after 13 years of compulsory schooling. Thus came onto
my desk the endlessly hypnotizing lava lamp as focal point. If you're a teacher watching
this, give it a try. It's good for a certain kind of student, and really chills the vibe
of the room, man.
Do you think the next ten years will be better or worse for humanity, and more or less impactful
on human history than the previous ten years? Thinking about impact over the long run of
human history, it's pretty clear that impact tracks with tech and tech with time. Ten thousand
years ago, there was very little you could do to impact the world. So I do expect the
next ten years will be more impactful than the last, and I will bet they're better than
the last. I'm less confident about that second part than I used to be, but I still think
it holds that, on average, each decade is an improvement. That is, until we accidentally
stumble into an existential threat, which is game over. Which is pretty... pretty bad.
Over the last ten years, your channel has grown a lot. What is the most important thing
that you've learned about creating content? If there's anything I've learned from thousands
of spoken words, it's that human communication is hard. Way harder than people think, precisely
because people think it's easy. You just say the words, and the other person hears them,
and bam! Understanding. Alas, no. Words are fuzzy things, and you don't realize how poorly
you string them together until you are forced to listen to yourself saying those words.
And even if you're happy with your string of words, you just don't know how those fuzzy
patterns of sound will pattern match in someone else's brain. Human communication is a dance,
and a dance requires partners. We all create content, and I think we should all keep that
in mind and be much more willing to work with the intended intention of our interlocutors.
What do you miss about internet culture from when you started on YouTube? This is my biggest
I-liked-that-band-before-they-were-popular opinion, but it finally dawned on me recently
that internet culture is the culture now. Even just two Q&As ago, I showed the internet
as the Wild West, but those days are long gone, thrust aside by content mines or suburbs
with homeowners' associations fixated on real estate values. I think Past Gray was
super naive to imagine the internet he loved could possibly both 1. explode in size, and
2. remain the frontier. How do you feel that your number one most-watched video is no longer
your UK explained video? Fantastic. I thought that UK video would forever be my albatross.
Like, oh, he never did anything as popular as the first thing he did. So I was very happy
when the solution to traffic topped the UK. And if the day ever comes where something
newer beats out traffic, I will be thrilled again.
Is there an underlying theme that connects all your videos? Not really. My YouTube colleagues
are forever telling me to be more strategic in the selection of topics, to target content
for growth and views and dolla dolla bills. And I know I should, but I just kind of can't.
Because the videos take so long from idea to completion, the only thing that really
matters is a topic that I can stay interested in for months, and that just doesn't work
for me with strategic selection or trying to have an underlying theme. But I guess if
you're looking for what's similar with all the videos, one human personality slider is
how much you are interested in things versus how much you are interested in people. Most
people are people people, but if you look at my videos, one common connector is the
near-complete dearth of people. What holds my interest tends to be very thing-oriented.
How does it feel to have teenagers that have been watching your content for the majority
of their life? I hadn't thought about that possibility until now, but if there are people
who have watched my videos for the majority of their life, say hi in the comments. What
do you think about the To My Future Me letters or videos? Have you ever made any? Lots of
people ask questions about sending letters forward or backward in time. I wouldn't want
to mess with the timeline going backward, and sending letters forward is boring, which
is why I've never done that sort of thing. Okay, well actually that's not true, no. One
of my teachers in school had us do this to write a letter to ourselves for when we graduated
high school, and when I got it, high school me did not care about anything grade school
me had to say. And so it goes now. I'm confident that ten years from now me would be positively
meh to get a letter from current me, in the same way current me couldn't be more meh about
what ten years ago me thought about anything. What was your closest experience to death
this decade? The nighttime driving that I did in my road trip video. I was at that point
years out of practice driving, I hadn't slept well the night before and had already driven
all day and then attempted to tackle both a super fast highway and then a pretty sketchy
road. Statistically, it is without doubt the most dangerous thing I've done in the last
ten years. Even though people watch the video and go, what's the dumb dangerous decision
he hyped up at the beginning? Driving at nighttime? LOL lame. But the reality of death is banality,
and it's not always visually obvious when death is close. For example, I was on an Indian
reservation for a project exploring a canyon and filming, and it was until a few days later
when reviewing the footage that I saw the solid ground I was standing on was actually
a bit of an overhang. It didn't fall, obviously, but it's going to fall at some point. And
had it done so, well, the reservation was off the main path and the canyon off the path
from that and the path I was on was off the path in the canyon. So an untimely crack would
doubtlessly have been game over. It's been suggested that you've developed an increased
caffeine dependence over the years. At this point, do you consider it an asset or an addiction?
If you had to categorize your YouTube career into eras, how would you split it? I feel
like that's more for the audience to decide what is, for them, the blue period of grey
or whatever, because the public perception of creation can often have very little to
do with the perception or intention of the creator. Again, human communication is difficult
and also art is not the artist. But for me, there's really only one important era shift,
and that's pre-Project Liberty and post-Project Liberty, which was, wait for it, the Statue
of Liberty video. Which I think almost no viewer would pick out as a big deal video,
but to me, it's the biggest. It's the video where I feel like I finally got my own writing
process, personally accepting its advantages and disadvantages. That may sound strange
because I'd been writing videos for seven years at that point, but I think this is just
part of what happens when you do something for a long time. Is the 10-year mark an accomplishment
or a reminder of the inescapable passage of time? Porque no los dos. How has the way you
spend your free time changed over the last 10 years? Two clear trend lines. Video games
up, books down. I've learned there's a huge number of books I just can't read because
I'll want to turn them into videos and I can read books faster than I can make videos,
so reading those would be just creating a huge pile of guilt for myself. And when your
job is mostly writing and reading, it's nice to turn that off, and video games are basically
the only thing in my life that truly shifts my brain into neutral. All that said, I think
that Droppin' Books has gone too far in the last, eh, five years? I don't like making
promises or predictions for my future self, but one of the things I'd like to be able
to say ten years from now is that I've inflected the reading curve. Who is sponsoring this
video? The most frightening video I uploaded this decade was the one where I asked you
to support the channel directly through membership instead of having sponsors. Clicking upload
that day, I didn't know what would happen, but I trusted in you, and since then together
we have learned the trouble with tumbleweed after flying across an ocean, we've talked
like a pirate, gone through the ticoi trilogy together, and of course revealed the perfectagon
of the hexagon and more. It is you who let each video flow from start to finish without
me needing to pause and tell you about our sponsor in the middle. It is you who supports
me, my family, and my team. It's you who allows me to explore the forest of all knowledge
and share what I've found. You sponsor my videos. And thank you. Thank you for everything,
internet. Thank you for my whole life. It's been a wild ten years.
You
