Welcome to the lab.
Let's see what's on the slab.
Shh!
Let the examination begin.
Part negative two.
The pleb to your way of thinking about gender is rigid, binary, and naturalistic.
There is penis, there is vagine, and that's all there is to say about it.
This way of thinking comes in part from certain prejudices favouring the firm, robust, masculine
hard sciences versus the flaccid, feminine, soft social sciences.
But the thing is, even if you're a science pro, you should appreciate that this kind
of black and white rigidity is not a good way to think about anything.
Even Richard Dawkins, the most manly, robust, skeptical science man in the world, came up
with a thought experiment to illustrate this point in biology.
It goes like this.
Imagine you take a rabbit and you place her mother next to her, and next to the mother,
the mother's mother, and in a long line you lay out the lineage of rabbits for millions
of generations.
Eventually, you get to an ancestor that is definitely not a rabbit, it's say, the common
ancestor of the rabbit and the duck, or whatever the fuck peeps are.
So at one end of the line you have an ordinary modern rabbit, and at the other some kind
of prehistoric animal that is definitely not a rabbit, though from each generation
to the next, the difference between mother and daughter is imperceptible.
So, without ever arriving at a definite point where we can say, this is the boundary dividing
the rabbits from the non-rabbits, there is nonetheless a continuous genealogy of organisms
leading from non-rabbits to rabbits.
So what we have on our hands here is a spectrum of rabbitness, you can compare it to the spectrum
between boys and men.
A ten year old is a boy, a thirty year old is a man, and somewhere between the boy becomes
a man, though there's no definite day where the dividing line occurs.
But the human brain does not like this idea.
We naturally prefer binaries to spectrums, which could be why most traditional societies
have some kind of ritual that marks the moment when a boy becomes a man, usually involving
doing some kind of fucked up shit to kids.
Good thing I inhaled all that gas.
What is it with men?
So words like man and rabbit are nouns, and nouns generally have a binary function in
our grammar.
We don't have a word for something that's slightly a rabbit, moderately a rabbit, or
mostly but not all a rabbit.
Things are either rabbits or they aren't, but that's just a rule of the English language,
and nature does not abide by the rules of English.
This kind of discrepancy between the way words are used and the way biology actually works
is one of the reasons why it's so difficult to explain the concept of evolution to people
who are new to the idea.
As the beautiful old creationist proverb goes, a monkey cannot give birth to a man, it ain't
natural.
But thinking about it certainly turns me on.
I'm just going to palpate the interior here, palpate, palpate, palpate, oh shit.
Congratulations it's a rabbit!
Part negative one, biological sex.
So the boundaries of the concept rabbit seem well defined at first, but any attempt to
actually define what those boundaries are seems to fail, and the same is true with pretty
much any word we want to define.
So take for instance the concept of a chair, an example philosophers like to use because
they sit on their asses all day doing absolutely nothing of value to society.
How do you decide what is and isn't a chair?
One way you could do this is to come up with a list of necessary or sufficient conditions
that describe what counts as a chair.
So for example you could say that a chair is a man-made object with a backrest that
people sit on.
Well, but what about a rock naturally shaped like a chair that people sit on?
What about a sculpture of a chair that no one sits on?
What if the chair was made by a woman you misogynistic trash?
It's not really possible to come up with a list of conditions that defines every way
we use the word chair.
Instead what we have are a bunch of related properties, like being man-made, being sat
on, and so on, none of which is alone necessary or sufficient to define what it really means
to be a chair.
So with that in mind, what happens when we try to define the biological categories of
male and female?
Well, the first thing we might do is come up with a list of anatomical features, including
chromosomes, gonads, genitals, hormones, and secondary sex characteristics.
We might see a female as a person with XX sex chromosomes, ovaries, a vagina, a certain
hormone balance, and secondary sex characteristics like breasts and soft skin that you just
want to pour milk all over.
But hold on, we know that there are transsexual women who have female secondary sex characteristics,
hormone balance, and genitals, but not ovaries or XX chromosomes.
So insisting there are exactly two biological sex categories leaves us unable to accurately
describe the anatomy of people who don't conform to our preconceived conceptual schema.
Now some geniuses think they can solve that problem by pronouncing that henceforth only
chromosomes shall be used to determine sex.
But even insisting on a purely chromosome-based categorization doesn't always work, because
there are intersex people who have just an X chromosome, or XXY, XYY, XXX, or other atypical
karyotypes.
There are also people with a condition called Swyer syndrome, who are born with a uterus,
fallopian tubes, a cervix, and a vagina, but have XY sex chromosomes.
Now if you're aware of all this and you still want to insist on strictly binary sexual
categories, then you're trying to force reality to fit your preconceived conceptual
scheme instead of adapting your concepts to fit reality.
And that is what bad science looks like.
I haven't even started talking about gender yet.
I've been so goddamn busy prematurely cockblocking the penetrating scientific insights of armchair
anatomists.
Now this is the part of the video where I'm sure you've already guessed that I say gender
is different from biological sex, and yes, it is a social construct.
But what is a social construct?
A common misconception is that something's being a social construct means that it has
no reality, that it's just a figment of the imagination, but that is not the case.
Money is a social construct, but money is very real.
All our lives are structured around money to some extent, and the limits placed on us
by our finances can often be just as restrictive as the limits placed by the laws of gravity.
However, the difference between gravity and money is that gravity works the same way no
matter how humans behave, whereas the very existence of money is contingent on certain
human behaviors and beliefs.
If our practices change, money changes.
Does gold in World of Warcraft count as money?
Well, does it work like money?
Yeah, pretty much.
So it's money.
Welcome to cyberreality.
And you would be foolish to try to determine the monetary value of actual gold by investigating
its chemical properties.
Instead, you should investigate the economic behavior of human beings, and the symbolic
function of gold in our societies.
The same goes for gender.
Examining human bodies is a lot more fun than doing sociology, but chromosomes and genitals
will not tell you which gender wears lipstick, or raises the children, or scars the skin
in order to embody the spirit of the crocodile.
So even though social science is soft and girly and unrobust, if we're serious about
understanding gender, it's kind of the only option we have.
Because not everything is reducible to biology.
Sometimes people with XY chromosomes have soft, smooth skin that I just want to pour
milk over, and there's absolutely nothing wrong with it because I'm an adult and it's
my choice, and it's my right, and it's not harming anyone so just leave me alone.
One popular way of trying to make sense of gender is depicted in a diagram called the
genderbread person.
The diagram shows a series of sliders representing spectrums of biological sex, gender expression,
and identity.
The sex spectrum represents intersex and transsexual people better than the binary categories.
The identity slider represents the psychological aspects of gender, including transgender and
non-binary identities, and the expression slider represents the social performance of
gender.
So this way of defining gender is a lot more sophisticated than the view that refuses to
look beyond biology.
But the genderbread person is still a massive simplification, since it presents the poles
of these spectrums, like masculinity and femininity, as if they were eternal and stable, when in
fact they're socially constructed and historically contingent.
The 18th century idea of masculinity is very different from, say, the contemporary hipster
idea of masculinity, and class and racial distinctions are excluded from the diagram
altogether.
So if we want to know what gender is in the sense of the social behavior of gender, then
we should just ask sociologists, anthropologists, and historians, and they'll tell us that
there are as many masculinities and femininities as there are cultures.
But that still doesn't answer what it means to psychologically identify as a man or a
woman, nor does it tell me the relationship between society's norms and me as an individual.
But that's what I really want to know.
I want to know who I am inside.
What to make of all this emptiness.
Whether I'm a man or a woman or something else.
I just want to know who I am, dack.
It's 2017, man.
I don't know what gender I am.
Now listen to Synthwave.
Let's do some das.
It's fucking 2017, man.
If you want to advocate against gender injustice, you're gonna need to come up with an account
of what it means to be a woman in order to make sense of what you're doing.
And feminists with different political goals will tend to define womanhood differently.
So TERFs, who think that patriarchal oppression is based solely on the reproductive anatomy
of women's bodies, basically end up back on the same page as the science bros.
There is penis, there is vagine.
Penis oppresses vagine.
Now a more sophisticated radical feminist like Catherine McKinnon might argue that the
essential thing is not anatomy, but a certain kind of power dynamic, womanhood being defined
by sexual submission and objectification.
Whereas a queer feminist like Judith Butler might want to place more emphasis on the performative
nature of gender, and on the possibility of queering practices like drag to reveal its
contingent and imitative nature.
And a transgender feminist will more likely want to define womanhood in terms of a psychological
state, perhaps a proprioceptive sense of belonging in a woman's body.
So which of these definitions are correct?
Well, all of them are, in a way.
We should adopt whatever definition makes the most sense in a given context.
If we're advocating for abortion rights, it makes sense to take the biological view.
But if we're talking about the way women are treated in public spaces, it might make
more sense to take the performative view.
We have to always try to understand a broad concept like gender in a given context.
It's like yeah, in some contexts I prefer to pour milk on someone else's face, but
in other contexts I like someone to pour hot milk all over my goddamn face and t-t-t-t-t.
Ah, fuck.
Nurse, get my lawyer on the phone.
Babies, I'm sorry.
Part Infinity.
Final Enlightenment.
Now maybe you're not satisfied with this answer.
You're thinking it's fine to have operational definitions of something for a specific purpose,
but you want to know what gender is, really.
What does it really mean to be a man or a woman?
Well, these are philosophical questions, and the defining feature of philosophical questions
is that they have no final answer.
Philosophy can only take you to the end of a cul-de-sac.
It can help you understand the cul-de-sac, but that's as far as our little monkey brains can go.
Once you reach the dead end, that's it.
You're done.
There's no more thinking you can do.
It's time to sit back, relax, and get inspired to live each moment bolder and louder.
With a nice cold Pepsi.
Amen.
Amen.
I love you.
It's fucking 2017, man.
