♪♪
Christmas and New Years are always a time of sadness and horror for me.
Not because I don't get on with any of my relatives.
They're great and I've forgiven them for almost all of their crimes.
No, the last decade of holidays have been a nightmare for me
because I've had to prepare for yet another knife in the back of Doctor Who.
I mean, who can forget the Christmas Invasion
in which the Doctor farts around in bed for 40 minutes
and then at the end he wakes up and has a sword fight in his pajamas with Bloodskull Man.
That's his name. Don't go and check.
Partway through the fight, he loses a hand, but not really.
It comes back and he wins.
Yay! Woo!
Oh, by the way, that hand turns out to be an incredibly important plot device 22 episodes later,
so I hope you were paying attention on Christmas Day.
Oh, and 16 episodes after that,
the Doctor doesn't want to change his appearance while regenerating,
so he pours his excess energy into the hand
and it forms a new version of the Doctor
who goes off to live with Rose in an alternate universe.
Look, all I'm saying is this Christmas special has a lot to answer for
and it will not be forgiven.
I've brought you...
No second chances.
["Jingle Bells"]
["Jingle Bells"]
["Buzzer"]
Or who can forget the 2007 Christmas special,
Voyage of the Damned,
which is set on the Titanic but in space
and Kylie Minogue is in it
and there's robot angels
and they portray the Doctor as a literal messiah figure
on Christmas Day.
This episode incurred criticism not only from fringe religious groups for, you know, this,
but also from the last living survivor of the actual Titanic.
But a spokeswoman for the show insisted no offense was intended.
Voyage of the Damned is set on a spaceship called the Titanic
and not a boat.
This year, however, might at least prove to be the last
bizarre Christmas nightmare I'll have to endure
because this year is the end of Stephen Moffat's...
occupation of the Doctor Who showrunner position.
His regime is ending.
And that means this year might truly be cause for celebration,
even more than spending time with your loved ones.
Let's take a look at Moffat's final episode of the show
and then speculate about what Doctor Who can get up to
now that it's finally free of his grasp.
["Jingle Bells"]
It-it talks if you press it,
but in the last take, I, like, threw it at the camera
and it hit the ground and stopped making the noise.
So we're gonna have to roll that take now.
["Jingle Bells"]
["Jingle Bells"]
["Jingle Bells"]
["Jingle Bells"]
["Jingle Bells"]
["Jingle Bells"]
If you've seen my Sherlock video,
which, um, I think a couple of you might have done,
you'll already know that Moffat's relationship
with Doctor Who is lifelong.
He was a fan of the original series
and he wrote the children-in-need charity spoof
of Doctor Who, which was actually the first appearance
of the Doctor on television for quite some time.
It ended, perhaps fittingly,
with the Doctor regenerating into a woman.
Now, when I saw this years ago,
I thought, wow, wouldn't that be nice?
But I realize in retrospect,
after reading some recent comments by Moffat,
that this, to him, was meant as a joke.
And, of course, my sonic screwdriver.
Oh, look, it's got three settings.
Doctor, stop that!
Ha-ha, the Doctor keeps dying in silly little ways
and regenerating.
What's the next comical thing he can regenerate into?
Oh, a woman. Ha-ha-ha.
Oh, I imagine.
A woman Doctor, that's a laugh, right?
Back before Moffat was showrunner,
when all he'd done was work on several
critically praised comedies
and the best episodes of the show so far,
and that one other really, really bad show,
which we pretended didn't happen, you know,
we did him a favor, it was easy to interpret
having the Doctor regenerate into Joanna Lumley
as this cool, progressive thing,
like, hey, why not have a female incarnation?
But Moffat's actual intent is made much more clear
by closer inspection and, of course,
by his more recent statements.
This isn't a show exclusively for progressive liberals.
This is also for people who voted Brexit.
That's not me politically at all.
But we have to keep everyone on board.
I haven't actually met a Scottish person before.
Okay, firstly, credit to Stephen
for recognizing the mysterious correlation
between people who voted Brexit
with a female Doctor, but secondly,
isn't it telling that he views
casting a woman as a move
for progressive liberals?
Like, is that really the only reason
anyone would ever think
to cast a woman in this role?
Moffat's approach rears its head in the special itself
with the first Doctor's, shall we say,
ironic sexist comments?
Older gentlemen, like women,
can be put to use.
You can't say things like that.
Look how silly this old man is being.
Hey, remember casual misogyny? Hilarious.
Look how far we and the Doctor have come.
But writing like that loses its appeal
when it's written by the man who had
several great opportunities to actually
cast a woman as this character
and didn't because he was worried about
upsetting the kind of people who actually
think like that. That's not to say
I don't think Capaldi was a good choice for the Doctor.
Like almost all the actors this show gets
nowadays, he does a great job
with the material he's
given, and season eight was
almost all right, but even the episodes
of the show written by other writers are affected
by Moffat's poor plans as showrunner
for the overall direction of the wider story.
While most of the good episodes, like Mummy on the
Orient Express or Flatline, get to be their
own thing, there's still a lot of mucking about
with this overarching story about deciding
whether or not the Doctor's secretly a bad guy
who kills people, and it's bad,
and Missy, a mysterious
figure who keeps meeting up with people who died
during each episode, so a fairly
decent chunk of each writer's episode gets
stolen to serve Moffat's inevitable
nonsense season finale.
Moffat's plans weaken the individual episodes
not just by literally leeching away precious
script pages they could have used to tell the
story at hand, but it also means the individual
writers can't really do anything
with the Doctor or his companion for
that season, Clara, because that would risk messing
up whatever big character moments Moffat
had planned for the end of the season.
The characters couldn't really develop their relationships
with each other or change as people.
At best, sometimes Clara realizes the
Doctor's not always the best guy, and then changes
her mind in the next episode and goes to hang out with
him again. Capaldi and Smith's Doctors
didn't get to develop or grow the way
Eccleston and Tennant's did. You couldn't
really have an episode quite like Dalek
or The Empty Child in a show led this way,
and that's especially sad because
Moffat wrote one of those episodes. Moffat's
approach as a showrunner inadvertently
prevents these kinds of episodes and
great moments that define a series from
happening, and that just really sucks.
The third Capaldi series
was basically a soft reboot. The first episode
was even called The Pilot.
The Doctor gets reintroduced in a new context
as a prestigious professor. Hey, Steve,
wouldn't it have been great if we'd
written a bunch of episodes that show him
reaching this point in his life?
I mean, literally, like, a whole season
of television could have been written about how the Doctor
ends up where he is and the place he's at at the start
of this season, and they just don't! It just
starts here! That's a whole
season of storytelling you could have had
gone! Bill was in this season
and I think she starts out as a really interesting
companion, but then the series
kind of is sort of generic
the whole way through, so she doesn't really
get to be as interesting as I think she could have been.
It's clear that Moffat still has
no idea how to pace a full
season of television. Long story short,
at the end of that season, Bill dies,
sort of, and the Doctor saves the day
but is critically injured in the process, and he
starts to regenerate. He wanders out into
the South Pole and meets the First Doctor,
which is where our Christmas special picks
up. I will now attempt
to recount in full
the plot of the 2017
Doctor Who Christmas special.
The story begins
with that meeting again. Then, for some reason,
time stops. Then, a First
World War soldier, played by Mark
Gatiss, because why not, is about
to die, but then time stops for him
as well, and then he gets pulled into
the North Pole at the same time as the
two Doctors. An entity reveals
itself and abducts the TARDIS
and demands they hand over the soldier,
and then manifests a new version of Bill
who the Doctor thought had died.
The Doctor doesn't want to hand the soldier over
without getting more information, so
instead of asking what's happening,
they all, uh, run
away and pretend to let
the TARDIS get stolen, and then they
all run off to the other Doctor's TARDIS
to go to a planet we haven't seen before
where the Doctor claims we'll find the biggest
database in the world. The Doctor
assumes this glass lady
thing, uh, is based
on a real person and just needs a really big database
to look them up, for some reason.
The database shoots at the
Doctor, but gives up when it realizes
he's already dying, for some reason.
It turns out to be the Dalek
from that one episode two seasons
ago where they all went into a Dalek
and made it want to kill other Daleks by accident
while trying to turn it good.
He's just sort of hanging
out here shooting Daleks whenever
they turn up to shoot him. So it turns
out that Daleks are all hooked up
into some special, uh,
mega mainframe that's
the biggest database in the world.
The Doctor tries to convince it to
tell him who the glass lady is. Meanwhile,
the manifestation of Bill keeps turning
into the glass lady, uh,
and sort of messing
with the soldier and the Doctor, but not actually doing
anything with them. They just, she just sort of turns
into glass when they're not looking,
and then nothing happens.
Um, it doesn't actually do anything.
Anyway, the Dalek looks up the lady's face
and it turns out that she's
the creator of a future humanities
time-traveling
supercomputer designed to, get this,
abduct everyone who ever dies
from time and scan
their memories at the moment of their deaths
and then put them back, uh,
to build a big database of
all of their memories. The Doctor
realizes there was no threat,
uh, this episode and there were no
stakes, uh, gives up
and, uh, the soldier hands himself over.
Oh.
It's not an evil plan.
I don't really know
what to do when it isn't an evil plan.
We're 40 minutes into the episode, Stephen!
They go back to where he was supposed to die
but then he doesn't because the Doctor
delayed the death by a few hours
and it turns out that it's that
one time all the fighting stopped at Christmas.
Oh, hey, they actually worked
Christmas into it and semi-justified
having this random guy
be the guy who gets abducted. Oh, also
he's an ancestor of Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart
for some reason.
Captain Archibald Hamish
Lethbridge-Stewart.
That's a thing that Moffat keeps doing
and I'm really not sure why. The entity
which it turns out is called Testimony
brings out Nardole as well
so, uh, he can say bye to them
and then also Clara who he forgot
because of time bullshit in the last season
but Testimony gives him
his memories back using magic
and then both Doctors give up
and decide to regenerate
out of spite.
Capaldi gives a speech to his next self
saying that they should be nice to people.
This scene would probably be a real
tearjerker if it was attached to an episode
of television with any stakes or plot
and then he finally goes out the way
we all wish we would by
exploding violently into
light and fire while transforming
into Jodie Whittaker.
Sigh.
I have a few
small questions.
Why didn't the entity just explain itself
and make it clear it didn't have any ulterior motives
the way it happily did once the Doctor
asked a Dalek to Google it for him?
Why did it threaten him at all considering
that it has the memories of everyone who ever died
so it knows all about him
and knows that he's a peaceful guy
who doesn't need to be threatened?
Why did the Doctor decide the only solution
was to go find that one Dalek from two seasons
ago and didn't get mentioned again?
How does he know where it ended up?
Why, if the Dalek hates
Daleks and wants to kill Daleks and can
clearly see down to the ground level
and make fairly accurate shots,
has it not killed all the de-shelled
and still alive Daleks squirming around
on the surface where it can definitely see them?
I mean, the catchphrase is exterminate
not I'm gonna break off your
outer casing and then just sort of
chill out and wait for someone
to come here and have a half-baked
horror scene where one of them squirms
on Mark Gatiss' face for five seconds.
Why has the Dalek since
also decided it wants to kill the Doctor?
Why does it give up when it
sees that he's already dying?
And even if, for some reason, it's decided
that the best thing to do is leave
the dying to die without
killing them, why does it actually believe
he's dying even though it definitely
knows Time Lords regenerate?
Because A, Daleks know how Time Lords work.
That's like one of their, like, main things.
And B, Daleks apparently
have a mega hive mind super database
bigger than the one the Time Lords
have. Next question, why
did the Daleks have a comprehensive mega
hive mind super database bigger than
the Time Lords have? Who, by the way,
are the lords of all of time.
And who plugged all these bloody wires
in? It doesn't even have arms.
It's just a plunger and a whisk.
How did he? Why a
World War I soldier?
Why didn't the Bill Potts entity just
explain itself right away and clear everything
up instead of insisting she was real?
Why undo the Doctor forgetting
Clara in the last five minutes of
the last run of the last episode
of this incarnation even being around?
Why did testimony
pretend they got away
for a while and unfreeze time
even though they happily froze it again
partway through the scene with
the Dalek? Why bring back this Dalek
for, like, a two minute conversation
that doesn't actually progress its story or
relationship with the Doctor at all and imparts
five seconds of exposition and yet
spend half the episode farting around
on the planet getting to it? Why were there
no stakes whatsoever?
And most importantly,
what exactly was Stephen Moffat
actually trying to do?
Um...
I think I figured out the answer
to that question at least. Remember
the end of time, the last special with Russell
T. Davies in charge and the last one
with David Tennant as the Doctor
where he saves the day and makes a heroic sacrifice
and then starts to regenerate? Remember
how the regeneration started and there was still
like 20 minutes of the Doctor
going around saying bye to everyone?
Even old companions who we hadn't seen
for quite a while like Rose and Martha
and we even find out what they've been up to in the interim
like that Martha and Mickey got married
and all the memorable alien creatures we met
get to say goodbye and or be
hit by a hammer by him
one last time? I love that stuff!
It was the end of both the lead actors and
showrunners tenure on the series so
they gave a proper send off to all the characters
from that era of the show, some recurring
others small but memorable enough that
it was great we got to see them one last time.
They even bring back Alonzo!
Alonzo! The guy from a Christmas special
three years ago who we didn't see
again comes back to feature
in David Tennant's victory lap and
that's just great! It got a
little bit silly having the dying Doctor
say bye to everyone before
his heroic sacrifice actually kicked in
but it was kind of nice to
remember how good the story had been
overall until that point. It's a nice
changing of the guard moment
since the old recurring cast
mostly goes away after this point along with
the lead actor and the producers and lead
writer went too so it's kind of
cool that this era of Doctor Who
got to say goodbye to itself in this big
way. It's clear that Moffat
sort of wanted to do that for
himself. Remember that with this episode's
invention of testimony, Moffat
could have written in a meeting with
almost any character he wanted
ever because
testimony's literally a database
of every human who has ever died.
Moffat could bring anyone
back to say bye to them
but then he discovered that he hadn't
created any characters worth going back
to and finding and reminding us about.
This is a serious question. Who else
from Moffat's episodes for the last
five years does anyone actually
remember? Oh yeah, I really
missed the sinister puddle
or all eight flavors of
the new Dalek gumdrop brigade.
Just kidding, everyone quietly tried
to forget that redesign and even Moffat
said they were a mistake. All the memorable Moffat
written characters I'd ever want to see again
happened before he was running it.
So Moffat's opportunity to say bye to all
of his beloved characters amounts to
Clara, Nardole,
Bill, the first
doctor, and
what, this Dalek? Can't even say bye
to Emily Pond either because Karen Gillan's
too busy on Jumanji or Guardians
of the Galaxy or
Untitled Avengers film? Now I really
did want to answer the question of why Moffat would decide
to have this Dalek and
this planet in his last episode.
Well, luckily, I've tuned
my brain into the dunce
who thinks he's smart wavelength so
I know what Moffat was trying here.
The planet he goes to here is called
Villengard by the Doctor in a seemingly
throwaway line.
That's actually a place referred
to in a similar throwaway line
previously in a part Moffat wrote for season
one back in 2005.
In fact,
I used that scene in the Sherlock
video as an example of Moffat's good
writing. It was a reference to something cool
the Doctor did that we never got to see
and in retrospect it's a huge red
flag as to his major problems as a showrunner
but it's a kind of line that works
in a show run like this season was
where the Doctor actually does
stuff and interacts with
the story so it's like Moffat's
coming full circle by having the Doctor
go in the last episode he's gonna write
to a place mentioned in the first episode
he wrote. This is clever
but in a very
particular kind of way.
All it does is make the few people
who'll even get the reference feel clever
and I remember a time
when Doctor Who had loftier goals
than that. It's not a problem
in itself that he did it or anything,
it's just indicative of the structural flaws
in his work that he put in the effort of making
references like this to his own previous stories
but not enough to write a story
that was good and worked on its own
which I think is a flaw. Moffat
is so short on old familiar faces
from his run to say goodbye to
that it brings back that Dalek they ran around
inside of for an episode and had that
scene I used in the Sherlock video as an example
of really poor writing.
I am not a good Dalek.
You are a good Dalek.
Because people don't believe there could be any
such thing as a good Dalek.
I am not a good Dalek.
You are a good Dalek.
It's so weird
that the last thing Stephen Moffat is ever
going to write for Doctor Who
features two of
the best and worst things
of his writing that I singled out
in a video I made that got really popular
shoehorned into each other.
Like, is he calling me out?
Has he seen
the video?
Are you watching this now, Stephen?
Or did he really think everyone was dying
to see what happened to Rusty the Dalek?
I hope you all recognize the
importance of the Dalek being called Rusty
by the way. It's a name from the Moffat
school of clever references.
It's a reference to the previous
showrunner, Russ T.
Davies. Rusty...
The Doctor spent that episode
inside the Dalek, trying to save
it from within. It's a clumsy
metaphor for how Moffat saw his own
input on the early series. He was running
around loose inside Rusty's machine,
making little adjustments and making
it better than it was, impacting it
in some grand way. Bringing Rusty back
here is Moffat's way of tipping his
hat to the previous showrunner.
It's a pity it takes up a huge chunk of an episode
in desperate need of any actual
stakes or plot.
Oh. It's not an evil plan.
Imagine sitting in front
of your computer
with the script for your final Doctor Who
episode, and looking at a
screen where you have physically
typed the words
Oh
It's not an evil plan
This was all pointless.
That's the place where I would do a rewrite
or hope that, like, someone would stop
me. Why didn't anybody stop
him? And worst of all, this could actually
have been some kind of neat payoff.
An actual answer to the questions raised
in one of the earliest Capaldi
episodes. Like, has the Doctor
changed as a person in the almost three
full seasons since these characters met?
Has the Dalek changed?
How is their relationship going
to develop? This could be a genuinely
good bookend on this era of the Doctor
that I didn't even see coming.
Like, maybe something Moffat set
up really did actually pay
off satisfyingly in a clever way, with
this Dalek coming back, and we see how much they've all
changed. But time gets stopped
mid-conversation when he figures
out who Testimony is, and
the Dalek never gets to
finish the conversation, and we just
sort of leave. You know, for maybe
like 30 seconds, I actually
believed that Moffat had
set up an arc for the Doctor
that was going to conclude here, and we're gonna
see all the ways he's changed
by how he deals now with this Dalek,
and what conversation are they gonna have?
But then it just
stops.
It just doesn't.
I can't believe I let Moffat trick
me into thinking he was going to do something
smart, even for a minute.
I half-expected
Rusty to actually be an imaginary
invention by the Doctor's sister
to help remind him of the best
friends she killed, and who he remembers
as a dog. No, just kidding.
That would be far too stupid, wouldn't it?
God, even Testimony and the dead people
database thing is a reused idea
from a previous Moffat episode.
The last two episodes of season eight
dealt with a database of the minds
of a bunch of people who died and been
downloaded into it, and they thought they lived in an
afterlife, and fucking hell, when that
episode first came out, I thought that idea
was trite and had been done before by
Moffat. It was a clear ripoff of
Silence in the Library and Forest of the Dead,
two more episodes he wrote featuring
a giant library that saves the minds
and memories of dead people.
The longer his run goes on,
the more clear it becomes that
Moffat had about four really
good ideas, and
kept going back to them over and over.
["SILENCE IN THE LIBRARY"]
["SILENCE IN THE LIBRARY"]
["SILENCE IN THE LIBRARY"]
So his finale's a wash, along with the
rest of his run on the show, but at the very least,
it's over, and luckily,
since Doctor Who is basically uncancellable,
it can weather his
oncoming storm.
Did you get it? That was a needless reference.
I'm very clever. And make it through to the
other side and still have a chance
of being good next time.
That's kind of always been the beauty of
old DW. You can have a bad episode
and then go somewhere else next time
and do something different and try again.
I think it's kind of fantastic that
we have Doctor Who, this huge,
long-running cultural institution.
It's just lovely.
So I think it's good to be optimistic about the
future of the show.
Hopefully. Hopefully.
Everyone's excited. As excited as I am.
I really like Jodie Whittaker as an actress,
although, to be honest, I've loved almost all of the actors
in Doctor Who. The acting hasn't really been
the problem since they got rid of that guy
with the rubbish hair people keep claiming is me
in the comments of YouTube videos with him in them.
I have some, shall we say,
mixed opinions
about Chris Chibnall, the
showrunner who's taking over from Moffat.
He's written some pretty good stuff for Doctor Who before
and also he was the showrunner on
Torchwood, which is a shame,
but he also recently created
and wrote most of Broadchurch, which
Whittaker appeared in heavily, and which also
starred David Tennant, which is either
definitive proof that the British
television industry is a small room
with twelve people in it working on five shows
between them, or reassuring
since the lead writer probably
has a good grasp of his new lead's strengths.
It's also a really good sign
that Chibnall is credited as
the Broadchurch guy in pieces talking
about him taking over. Broadchurch was
really well-received in places and he's
been able to step out of the shadow of Doctor
Who and develop himself as a writer
over the years. It's nice that they're
not just promoting in some guy who
might have written a few good episodes once
but is untested as a lead writer.
Instead, they're bringing in someone with experience
running a pretty well-received show for
three series. It's also probably really nice
for Chibnall's career that he's not remembered
as the Torchwood guy because
I think we all want to forget the
Cyberwoman episode he wrote
where she's sexy and all
decked out in rubber.
So, you know, overall, I'm positive about
the new lead writer. He's
proven he...
I mean, there's a chance he
could...
The vice president of BBC Worldwide
says it's one of her favorite episodes of
Torchwood's
first series
and that's a really high watermark for
quality. I mean,
in terms of LGBT
representation, Torchwood
is, on the whole, vastly superior
to the main Doctor Who series.
Lots of
ideas just tucked away in a document in case
I don't know what to write.
Oh, that explains it!
Chibnall is the one credited
with the decision to have a female
doctor so his gender politics
can't be completely...
They beat the Cyberwoman
by spraying her with delicious
sauce.
So a pterodactyl eats it!
Oh, it's gonna be
rubbish, isn't it?
...
...
...
...
...
...
