Hello, everyone. Today, we're going to be talking about anti-vaccine propaganda.
Now, the ongoing coronavirus pandemic has obviously seen rise to a lot of discussion of vaccines,
and also, sadly, a lot of awful anti-vaccine arguments.
And for examples of how this sort of propaganda works, we're going to take a look at The Jimmy Dore Show.
Now, Jimmy Dore is a comedian and political commentator who hosts The Jimmy Dore Show here on YouTube,
on a channel with around 900,000 subscribers.
If you aren't familiar with The Jimmy Dore Show, Jimmy Dore styles himself as someone who critiques the political establishment,
including the Democrats, from the left.
And until recently, his commentary on vaccines followed that approach.
On December 21st of last year, Dore put out a video titled,
Vaccine for Elites, but Not for Nurses,
in which he expresses his anger that healthcare executives were getting vaccinated before frontline workers.
On April 30th of this year, Dore put out a video titled,
Bill Gates Denies Vaccine to Poor Countries,
in which he criticizes Gates for arguing in favor of patent protections on vaccines.
And on the 2nd of March of last year, he put out a video titled,
Pelosi, Corona Vaccine Should Be Affordable, WTF, where he says the following.
She wants to make the vaccines affordable.
She is a virus.
Yes, what kind of, you have to have a virus in your brain to think that, hey,
you know, we could, we could, well, here's what I said.
Of course, we could distribute the vaccine to all citizens as soon as it's available and stop a pandemic,
but we're not filthy socialists.
So lots of people are going to die.
That's what she's saying.
A functioning government would fucking inoculated citizenry against a goddamn pandemic and forget about a fucking profit motive.
So from these videos and others, Dore's position appears to be that vaccines are a good thing,
that they should be free, available to everyone regardless of status,
and that distributing the vaccine to all citizens as soon as it's available would stop the pandemic.
However, recently, something strange has been going on over at the Jimmy Dore show.
Dore has taken a hard turn into peddling anti-vaccine propaganda in videos that are absolutely full of deception,
flawed logic, and outright lies.
As for why this is, you only need to go to his channel and look at the view counts on his recent videos.
His anti-vaccine videos are some of the most popular content he's produced this year.
Bringing in a piece of the anti-vaccine audience provides a real financial incentive to keep producing that sort of content,
because some of those new viewers attracted by the anti-vaccine content will become premium members,
or head over to the Jimmy Dore Comedy Store, where they can buy mugs and hoodies and bags and hats and shirts and so on.
Now, you might say,
hold up there a second, Sean.
Maybe this is an unfair criticism.
Maybe this has nothing to do with money or chasing views.
Maybe this is just a coincidence.
Maybe Jimmy Dore just genuinely believes in the anti-vaccine arguments he feels compelled to share with the world.
Maybe he's just not had good counterarguments yet.
And I will admit that this is a possibility.
A slight possibility.
So, let's take a look at some of these arguments, then.
The first video I want to look at is titled,
Outbreak! 80% Vaccinated Singapore Has More Infections Than Ever, Released on October 6th.
This video features Dore reading out an article from Fortune.com titled,
Highly Vaccinated But More Cases Than Ever.
Singapore Shows The World What Endemic COVID Might Look Like, written by Grady McGregor.
And this video from Dore is a real masterclass in misleading an audience.
And to see what Dore does here, we're gonna read this article along with him and see how he represents it.
So, the article starts out,
highly vaccinated Singapore is battling a record wave of COVID-19 infections,
just as the city plans to reopen to the world.
But Singapore's 80% vaccination rate has kept severe cases and deaths down,
potentially proving that living with the virus versus trying to eradicate it is the surest path out of the pandemic.
Now, here's how Jimmy Dore starts reading the article.
On Monday, Singapore recorded 1,647 cases of COVID-19,
bringing its seven-day daily average to 1,545 cases,
higher than any other previous wave of the pandemic.
So what he did there was skip the first paragraph,
the one that states that Singapore's high vaccination rate has kept severe cases and deaths down,
and he started reading at the second paragraph, talking about the recent increase in COVID cases.
So he's avoided mentioning the positive effects of the high vaccination rate there.
But let's not draw any conclusions right now.
So, following this sentence read out by Dore, the article says,
But even as cases soar, COVID-19 deaths in Singapore have remained low.
The city's state of 5.7 million people has averaged three deaths per day in the last week.
Singapore's saving grace is its high vaccination coverage.
So let's hear Jimmy read that.
Uh, hang on, where is he?
Oh, he skipped down to here, the sentence that starts out,
So that's twice now that he's skipped mentioning the positive effects of vaccination.
Now, the sentence following this one also mentions Singapore's low death rate.
It says,
So, let's listen to Jimmy read that.
Singapore has now fully vaccinated over 80% of its population,
one of the highest rates in the world!
No, he's gone again.
Now he's back up here, having expertly dodged multiple separate instances of the article
directly praising Singapore's high vaccination rate.
The best that Jimmy Dore manages is showing this one reference to quote,
But he does not make clear, as the article does,
that this widespread immunity is due in large part to the high vaccination rate.
And this is how Jimmy reads out the rest of the article.
Well, no, he's not reading the article, really.
He's picking particular sentences out of it in order to present a biased view of it.
This is an article about how Singapore's high vaccination rate has kept deaths low
even as virus cases increase as the country eases lockdown restrictions.
It's a success story.
Jimmy Dore, by refusing to mention the positive effects of vaccination,
turns it into a scaremongering article about an increase in cases
in order to make the vaccine look ineffective.
Now, further down the article,
Jimmy Dore does something even worse than simply selectively quote the article.
He actually changes the text in order to better suit his argument.
So, first, let's read the relevant part of the article.
Throughout July and August, cases in Singapore ticked up to over 100 per day
after nearly a year of almost no infections due to the city's previous zero tolerance policy.
That policy included stay-at-home orders, intensive testing and contact tracing,
and a ban on foreign visitors.
This month, cases have risen exponentially from 180 on September 1st
to roughly 500 by mid-September and to nearly 1,500 this week.
On Monday, Singapore said that it would reintroduce some social distancing measures
including reducing dining groups from five to two people at restaurants
and directing companies to allow employees to work from home.
Singapore's government said the measures will be in place for at least one month
to prevent the healthcare system from being overwhelmed
and to allow the city to scale up services to help infected patients recover at home.
So what's happened here, according to this article anyway,
is that Singapore had very strict lockdown measures
and a low number of coronavirus cases.
Once a large percentage of the country was vaccinated, however,
they started easing those lockdown measures
which led, of course, expectedly, to an increase in cases.
But since the country has a very high vaccination rate,
the number of deaths remained low.
The vaccine, of course, does not make you completely immune from catching the virus
but it does make it much, much less likely that you will develop serious symptoms
or die as a result of catching the virus.
However, Singapore is still wary of overloading its hospitals
so is planning to reintroduce lockdown measures as needed
in order to control the number of cases.
This all makes perfect sense.
Very strict lockdown orders, then a high vaccination rate,
then a lifting of those orders leading to increasing cases
with some orders reintroduced in order to avoid overwhelming healthcare capacity.
This is not too hard to follow, you'd think.
But Singapore's growing caseload has raised alarms, nonetheless,
because of the speed at which cases have climbed.
Despite policies including stay-at-home orders,
intensive testing and contact tracing,
and a ban on foreign visitors,
and 80% of them are vaccinated,
they're having the biggest outbreak ever.
Now, sharp-eyed viewers will have noticed
that what Daw just read out is not what the article says.
And let's look at them side by side here.
The article says,
Throughout July and August, cases in Singapore ticked up to over 100 per day
after nearly a year of almost no infections
due to the city's previous zero tolerance policy.
Emphasis on the word previous there.
Then it goes on to say,
That policy included stay-at-home orders,
intensive testing and so on.
Jimmy Daw's text says,
The speed at which cases have climbed despite policies
including stay-at-home orders, intensive testing and so on.
He snips out the sentence,
making it clear that these policies were the previous policies,
the policies that were lifted,
and he puts the word despite in there.
Now, the word despite is not in this paragraph in the original article,
and this makes it seem like these policies are current, ongoing policies.
He's rewriting what the article says to make it say something different.
Now, I'd like to pause here and ask a question
to any fans of Jimmy Daw's content that might be watching this video.
Now, I know that the response to me saying
Jimmy Daw produces anti-vaccine content will be to say,
No, he doesn't.
Daw doesn't directly tell anyone not to get the vaccine.
He got the vaccine.
And he says that you can get the vaccine if you like.
You know, he's not anti-vaccine.
He's just asking questions.
He's just got some concerns.
He's just reporting the vaccine news.
Now, my question is, if this was true,
if Jimmy Daw really was just innocently asking questions
and provoking debate,
why does he need to lie?
Why is he selectively quoting the article
to avoid mentioning the positive effects of vaccination?
Why is he editing the text of the article
to make lockdown measures seem ineffective?
If he was just reporting the news,
he would just read out the article in full, right?
If he's just asking questions,
why not ask,
Why does Singapore have one of the lowest COVID death rates in the world?
And the answer is because Jimmy Daw
is trying to present a biased view of vaccines.
He is producing content specifically
to attempt to draw in an anti-vaccine audience.
He's just doing it with plausible deniability,
because he doesn't want to be banned by YouTube.
But let's be fair here.
Maybe you're thinking,
Well, okay, the way Jimmy Daw read out that one article
was a bit dodgy,
but I'm not ready to brand him a liar over it.
I need more evidence for that.
So, okay, how about this?
On the 14th of October,
the site healthfeedback.org
published an article that was critical
of Jimmy Daw's statements about COVID-19.
And in particular here,
we're interested in their criticism of his statements
about the drug ivermectin.
They say,
While it is true that ivermectin is used in humans
and that the scientist who discovered it
won a Nobel Prize,
what Daw didn't tell his viewers
was that neither of those facts have any bearing
on whether ivermectin is effective against COVID-19,
specifically.
Reliable studies haven't shown that ivermectin
is effective against COVID-19.
So, apparently, Jimmy Daw has been spreading
inaccurate information about ivermectin,
telling his audience
that ivermectin is effective in treating COVID,
which would be very irresponsible.
However,
in a video posted to YouTube on the 19th of October,
Jimmy Daw defended himself
against the claims in this article
by saying that they're all made up.
So, according to Jimmy Daw,
he's never said anything like the claims in the article.
He's never said ivermectin is effective in treating COVID.
However,
Uh-oh.
Now, if you go looking for that video
on Jimmy Daw's YouTube channel,
you won't find it.
It's actually specifically against
YouTube's content policies to post videos
that feature, quote,
categorical claims that ivermectin
is an effective treatment for COVID-19.
So, did YouTube delete that video?
Did Jimmy Daw take it down,
perhaps in preparation for COVID-19?
So, did YouTube delete that video?
Did Jimmy Daw take it down?
Perhaps in preparation to claim
that he never said exactly
what he did say in the video?
I don't know.
What Jimmy can't take down, though,
is his appearance on Joe Rogan's show.
So, what about, uh, like,
can we talk about ivermectin?
Yeah, sure.
So, I covered it,
what they did in Mexico City,
and ivermectin seems to be
a drug that not only treats it,
but it will prevent you from getting it.
Well, now, according to Jimmy Daw,
ivermectin doesn't just seem
like it treats COVID,
it will actually stop you from getting it
altogether. Now, if you watched that clip,
it's quite funny, because by making
such a direct medical claim,
he clearly worries Rogan a bit,
who starts saying, well, we need more studies,
you know, I'm just an MMA guy,
don't listen to me about health stuff.
Rogan's clearly also worried about the
wrath of the YouTube censors.
And speaking of, Jimmy Daw's
last video, YouTube's new censorship
rampage over vaccines,
starts out with Daw making a rather
embarrassing error.
And I wish I had Glenn Greenwald on to talk
about this with me, but the irony here
is that
inside this article,
talking about how YouTube's
gonna stop misinformation about vaccines,
it includes misinformation
about vaccines.
This is from the AP,
this will not be censored at
Twitter, this will not be censored at,
this is misinformation.
That is not true.
Scientists do not say
that the vaccines will end
the COVID-19 pandemic.
That is not what they say.
Do you want to know what they say?
COVID-19 won't be
eradicated. Who says that?
The who? The WHO.
The World Health
Organization says that.
The AP is misinforming
you. So do you understand
why there shouldn't be censorship ever?
So Daw first shows this article
from the AP which states that scientists
say public acceptance of
free immunizations will end the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Then he shows this article from TheHill.com
which states global health experts
say COVID-19 won't
be eradicated. Now Daw
treats these quotes as if they're contradictory
and goes on for several minutes about
how this proves the press is lying to you
and you can't censor independent voices
like his, and so on.
However, he's made a mistake here
because these two quotes are not contradictory.
Ending the current
COVID-19 pandemic can be done
without eradicating COVID-19
because the word pandemic describes
the state, not the existence
of the virus. With sufficient
resistance to the virus, the worldwide pandemic
would end, even if the virus
itself continues to circulate.
And one of the best ways to increase a population's
resistance to the virus is
widespread vaccination. Now you'd
think Jimmy Daw would know this, since
as we saw earlier, he stated last
year that distributing the vaccine to
all citizens as soon as it's available
would stop the pandemic. Now this
either means that Jimmy Daw believes that
ending the pandemic necessarily entails
entirely wiping out the virus,
and I don't believe he's that clueless,
or it means that he did understand
that widespread vaccination could end
the pandemic as he stated, and he's
just decided to forget
that information, for some
reason. Next up, I want
to give an example of how bad scientific
practices can give rise to
anti-vaccine myths. So let's
start with the Jimmy Daw video study
Vaccines Being Administered Incorrectly,
and we will track this claim back
to the source. So in this video,
Jimmy Daw is arguing that the way
COVID-19 vaccines are administered
is incorrect and dangerous,
and he does this by watching and repeating
the arguments of a different YouTube video
that being inadvertent intravenous
injections from a YouTuber
called John Campbell. In that
video, Campbell is reading out the study
Intravenous Injection of Coronavirus
Disease 2019 MRNA
Vaccine Can Induce Acute
Myopericarditis in
Mouse Model. So what did this
study investigate? Well, the COVID-19
vaccine is an intramuscular
or IM injection,
meaning it's injected into a muscle,
typically the deltoid. This
study attempts to discover what would happen with
an intravenous or IV
injection of the vaccine, meaning it's injected
directly into the bloodstream.
So they injected some mice with
the vaccine, some with IM
injections, some with IV injections.
Later, they dissected
the mice, the poor
mice, and they report that they found
myopericarditis in the IV
group, myopericarditis
being an inflammation of parts of
the heart. So the conclusion this
far would seem to be that IV injection
of the vaccine can be bad for the heart.
Emphasis on seem
to be. Please do not actually
make any conclusions right now. Stick with
me to the end of this bit. Trust me, there
is a twist up ahead. Now of
course, in humans, the vaccine is
injected in a muscle and not
intravenously, so we might say
what's the problem, right? Just don't
inject it intravenously and we're okay.
But what the authors of this study
are concerned about is the possibility of
an accidental intravenous injection.
So the person administering
the injection aims to inject the vaccine
into a muscle but accidentally injects
it into the bloodstream. And
they recommend blood aspiration as a way
to avoid this possibility. Now
aspiration is the drawing back of the syringe
plunger after insertion to
check if any blood flows back into the
needle, basically. They recommend this
as a way for the person administering the vaccine
to make sure they're injecting in the right place.
However, the World Health Organization
and the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention do not recommend
aspiration during the administration of the
vaccine because the size of the needle
and the size of the blood vessels at the site
of injection mean that it's an unnecessary
practice, they say. The CDC
guidance on vaccine administration
states that aspiration before
injection of vaccines or toxoids
is not necessary because no large
blood vessels are present at the recommended
injection sites. If this is
true, it means that there is no way to
accidentally replicate the sort
of intentional intravenous injection
seen in the experiment with the mice.
So since they consider it unnecessary
and it also leads to more painful
injections, they recommend against
it. Now it needs to be made very clear
here that this study did not find evidence
of accidental intravenous injections
of any COVID-19 vaccine.
That's not what the study was about.
They treated it as a hypothetical possibility
and then sought to investigate what would happen
as a result. For evidence
of the possibility of accidental
intravenous injection, they point to a study
called Blood Aspiration During
IM Injection, a self-reporting
study of nurses who were asked
questions about blood aspiration.
But I find this kind of tenuous.
That study concerns all
intramuscular medical injections,
not just vaccine injections,
in different parts of the body, not just
where vaccines are usually administered,
and it had an incredibly small
sample size, being quote,
limited to nurses in one small community
hospital and one state university.
The study did not survey all
the nurses in these settings. As a
result, the sample may not represent the
population of nurses practicing and
cannot be generalized. So what
do we have here then? Well, we have
one study arguing in favor of
aspiration during vaccine injections
versus the generally accepted guidelines
stating that it's unnecessary.
Phrasing this extremely generously
to the authors of the study, we could say that
some medical professionals recommend
aspiration for vaccine injections
and some don't. So how do we
get from here to Jimmy Dore stating
outright that they're administering
the jabs incorrectly?
And now we find out they're administering
the jabs incorrectly.
Jimmy Dore
has taken it upon himself to settle the
argument here, and he's done it seemingly
at random. He's picked the side that
agrees with him, funnily enough,
and said they're the ones who are correct
here, based upon no evidence
other than what he would like to be true
it seems. Now it might shock
you to hear this, but I disagree
with Jimmy Dore here. By itself
I don't find this study
credible, but unlike Jimmy Dore
I have an actual reason
for thinking that. So this
paper was linked on pubpia.com
which is a website for discussion and
review of scientific publications.
And the top comment is from Elizabeth
M. Bick. Now Elizabeth
Bick has a Wikipedia page, and allow me
to quote briefly from that.
Elizabeth Bick is a Dutch microbiologist
and scientific integrity consultant.
Bick is known for her work detecting
photo manipulation in scientific publications
and identifying over 4,000
potential cases of improper research
conduct. So Elizabeth Bick
and the other commenters on pubpia have some
concerns about this paper.
And allow me to relay a few of those.
Firstly, there's some discussion about
the amount of vaccine that the mice
were administered, with Bick estimating
that the mice received a dose that was
relative to their body weight between
50 and 500 times the
dose which is given to a human. However
another comment points out that due to
the metabolic differences between mice
and humans, the relative difference in
dosage wouldn't actually be that extreme.
However they still estimate that it would
be multiple times the dose given to a
human. Now I don't know anything
about the relative metabolic rates
of mice and men, I'm afraid.
So I'm gonna call this one a wash.
You know, it's a possible overdose. But I can't
say conclusively because I just don't
know. I have no way to fairly
decide one way or the other here.
So next up, and more conclusively,
the commenters claim the strain of
lab mice that were used in the study are
apparently prone to the sort of heart problems
that the study was looking for. And I quote
Pericardial fibrosis and
mineralization is a common background
finding in healthy Balb C
mice, as any pathologist with mouse
experience can attest.
The lesions shown in figures 1 and 2
show pericardial fibrosis and
calcification 1 or 2 days
after vaccination, which seems incredibly
fast. It usually takes 5
days to see this extent of fibrosis.
And other commenters chimed
in supporting these claims, with one
stating, this paper reports what appears
to be naturally occurring pericardial
lesions in Balb C mice.
It's essentially impossible to get such
advanced lesions in 1-2 days
post-injection. Now, if this
were true, if this study really is
just showing what were already existing
heart issues in these mice,
why is the study reporting that they were found
more often in the intravenous
group? What a mystery
we have here. Well, let's attempt to solve
it. And we'll start with a very basic
hypothesis.
What if the authors of this study
just mixed the mice up?
You know, what if it was that simple?
So, let's investigate, if
only to disprove this hypothesis.
Now, this study includes lots
of pictures of dead and dissected
mice, which do not worry, I will not
be showing here. What I will
be showing is scans of their heart
tissue, such as this one, figure
2, which shows, quote, blue
stained thickened visceral pericardium
over the right atrium and
ventricle at 1 dpi of IV
vaccine, which became more prominent
at 2 dpi, that's days
post-injection there. So,
this scan in figure 2a shows a
heart from the group which was given the intravenous
mRNA vaccine, and
the authors identify what they say are
problems with it. So, let's take
a look at how this compares to a scan of a
heart from the group of mice who were given the
intramuscular injection.
So, this is figure 5, from the section
titled, IM mRNA Vaccine
Administration Only Induced Mild
Myocardial Congestion and
Edema. And this particular scan
in figure 5c is from a mouse
who received an IM injection
instead of an IV injection
and thus has fewer heart problems
apparently. And let's take a look at these
side by side. So, IV
mouse on the left, IM
mouse on the right. Except,
and I've always wanted to
do this, computer
enhance, rotate
right image 115 degrees,
combine.
And, would you look at that,
this is the same image
right here. These heart scans are cited
both to show the damage caused by
intravenous injection and
the relative lack of damage caused by
intramuscular injection, but it's
the same scan. This is the
same mouse. So,
what happened here then? Well,
to put it in scientific terms,
they balled it up. This
same sample is marked both IV
vaccine 2dpi and
IM vaccine 2dpi,
which were the two groups the study was
seeking to compare. So, they've
mixed something up somewhere, clearly.
And props to Elizabeth Bick and
the commenters over at Pubpia for
spotting this, of course. Now, what
this means is that the results of this
study are suspect now.
How many other samples did the authors
of this study accidentally put in the wrong
groups? I don't know,
and nor does John Campbell or
Jimmy Dore. All we can conclusively
learn from this study is that the study should
probably be performed again.
Now, to be fair, you might argue
that maybe I'm overplaying this
one mistake. After all, it is
only one mistake, and
another counterargument could be that the
strain of mouse doesn't matter too much either,
even if they are prone to heart
problems, because with a large enough sample
size, those problems and
the occasional mistake wouldn't
impact the overall data
too much. It would all come out in
the wash. So, what
sort of group sizes are we
looking at with these mice? Well,
six
mice, for instance, in the
2DPI-IM group.
So, and this is something
important to remember beyond this one study
by the way, if you ever hear that
this or that was found in 50%
of tested mice, that
could be only three mice,
one of which in this particular study
ended up in the wrong group somehow.
What we're seeing here is bad science
getting picked up and repeated by
anti-vaccine propagandists.
Jimmy Dore and John Campbell
between them have 2 million YouTube
subscribers, and their videos using
this study to claim vaccines are being
administered incorrectly have hundreds
of thousands of views. And
a lot of those viewers are gonna go away, and all
they'll remember and possibly repeat to
other people is, well, I saw a video
about a study that said vaccines
damage your heart. Pointing out
the fact that there were major problems with the
study is all well and good, but it feels
like the damage has already been done at this
point. Now, just to be clear
here, this study is rubbish,
but I don't mean to give the impression
that an accidental intravenous injection
is completely impossible.
Of course, as with all medical procedures,
mistakes can and do happen.
And with millions of
vaccinations being carried out, it would be unreasonable
to assume that no mistakes occur
anywhere. And if some more
rigorous studies than this one led to a change
in the way the medical community at large
administers vaccines, I would have
no criticism of that. And
if further, even more rigorous
studies were then carried out and the medical
community changed back to the current
way of administering vaccines, I'd
have no criticism of that either.
Medical science, like all
science, changes and updates
as we learn new information. It's not
some hypocrisy, it's not some
trick being played on us, it's just
the way science happens.
Anyway, let's move on and look at another
video. So this is
Vax Side Effect, Sudden Hearing
Loss Reported. And here, Jimmy
Dore falls into that most classic
of argumentative pitfalls,
the correlation versus causation
misunderstanding. So, the
portion of this video that is actually about
hearing loss is mostly just Dore
watching a news report from ABC15
about some people who reported
experiencing tinnitus after being
vaccinated against COVID-19.
A lot of Dore's videos
consist of him just watching other
videos and making faces at them actually.
Now then, we need
to be careful and responsible
when investigating and reporting
this sort of thing. You see,
the issue here is one of scale.
It might be that you can find
217 people in
Arizona, say, who reported
tinnitus after being vaccinated.
But Arizona has a population
of millions of people,
and if an area's healthcare system
vaccinates millions of people, that
is a huge data set to pull from.
And tinnitus can have several possible
causes. Sinus congestion,
stress, anxiety,
high blood pressure, and so on.
Out of millions of people,
we'd expect some of those people
to report tinnitus anyway
on just an average week with no
vaccinations whatsoever.
So, this could just be a coincidence,
right? They could be incorrectly
identifying the cause of their
tinnitus as the recent vaccination
due to nothing more than unfortunate
timing. And let's do
a thought experiment here.
Let's imagine that millions of people
in a country are asked to go to a medical
facility and have a doctor or nurse
click their fingers in front
of that person's face.
That's all, then they leave and go
about their lives. So, the
basic framework of how we're currently
vaccinating people only without the
vaccinations, just a finger click.
Now, of those millions
of people, some of them will
develop tinnitus in the following week.
Some of them will experience
headaches, some of them will have a
heart attack or a stroke, and some
of them will die. But none of
that will have anything at all to do with
the finger click. It would be a coincidence.
Because we have millions of people
experiencing an event, we have
millions of chances for tinnitus
and headaches and heart attacks
to happen. But people, as a rule,
aren't very good at thinking in terms
of very large numbers. You'd
only need a dozen or so people having
heart attacks within a week of the finger click
to build an alarmist narrative about
finger clicks causing heart attacks
or whatever. But they wouldn't,
of course, it would be entirely coincidental.
What you would need to start
to prove a link between finger clicks and
heart attacks is an elevated
number of heart attacks relative to
what we would usually expect.
By itself, any one case
is just anecdotal evidence.
For instance, Nicki Minaj's cousin's
friend says his testicles swelled
up after getting vaccinated.
Does that anecdotal evidence
prove that vaccines make your
testicles swell? No,
it doesn't. By themselves, Nicki
Minaj's cousin's friend's giant
balls can't tell us anything about the
COVID-19 vaccine. When
reporting things like this, it's better to
cite actual medical studies looking
for a direct link between vaccines
and various symptoms instead
of relying on individual anecdotal
evidence. It's also not good
to put that anecdotal evidence in a video
titled, Vax Side Effect
as if it's already been settled.
Now, I'm sure that right now you're
all saying, hold up there, Sean.
COVID-19, as a
respiratory illness, can cause sinus
problems and therefore tinnitus.
And it does so at much higher rates than
among those who reported tinnitus after
being vaccinated. And this is especially
true of the Delta variant, which has been
shown to more greatly affect the upper
respiratory tract. So this is all moot,
right? If you want to avoid getting
tinnitus, it's still better to be
vaccinated than not. And you're
right to say all that. Well done.
A few anecdotal cases of
tinnitus not proven to be linked to the
vaccine is no argument whatsoever
against the vaccine. It does
not stand up to scrutiny.
But here's where we need to talk about the way in
which conspiracy theories are delivered
from the conspiracy theorist
to their audience, which is what is
happening here. Because the issue
is that this video is not supposed
to stand up to scrutiny.
None of these videos are supposed to
stand up to scrutiny. They're all
meant to be only a single piece of evidence
in this. An
overwhelming barrage of
relentless sort of evidence.
It doesn't matter if you
disprove one piece of evidence
because there's just so much of it
and all of it comes with plausible
deniability. Jimmy Dawes
grift works by producing an extremely
large amount of air quotes
evidence. None of which, when
examined closely, will stand up.
But taken together, it gives
the impression that there must be
some sort of point here, right?
This is the quantity, not
quality style of argument.
If you don't like one argument, I've
got another. And if you don't like that
argument, I've got another. And
so on and so forth until you just
run out of energy to refute all of
this. And if you ever do manage to
pin the conspiracy theorist down on one
particular irrefutable point,
they'll just lie and claim they
never said what they said. Like
we saw Jimmy Dawe do with his statements
about ivermectin. And
unfortunately, one result of anti-vaccine
propaganda like this is that misled
people end up getting seriously
sick and possibly dying.
And here, I'd like to be careful
to make a distinction between anti-vaccine
propagandists and people who
I guess we call vaccine-hesitant.
The majority of vaccinated people
fall into the vaccine-hesitant camp.
They aren't committed to opposing
vaccines, they just aren't sure
what is the safest course of action.
Of course, the safest course of action
is to be vaccinated, and the
vaccine-hesitant have undoubtedly heard
a lot of positive things about vaccines,
but they've also probably heard a fair
few vaccine lies, like those given
a platform by people like Jimmy Dawe.
Now, Dawe himself isn't even
pushing anti-vaccine conspiracies
for ideological reasons, I don't think.
I don't think he actually has any
opinions, to be honest. He's just someone
who's willing to cash in on a trend,
even if it ends up getting people killed.
Anyway, one way the vaccine-
hesitant group is targeted by
the propagandists is by exploiting
a distrust of authority.
Vaccine-hesitant people might not have
much trust in the political system in which
they live, and that can be for very
valid reasons. Beyond the usual
reasons to distrust people in power,
with regards to the pandemic, we've
seen them giving inaccurate or contradictory
medical advice, making
promises they can't keep, not
following their own lockdown regulations,
and so on. There is a lot
to criticize there. And there's also
a lot to criticize the pharmaceutical
industry for, and this is particularly
true in the United States, where there is
an entirely understandable skepticism
of their for-profit healthcare
system. So it's easy for the
propagandists to point to all this hypocrisy,
corruption, and incompetence,
and then try to marry that
to the science of vaccination.
See, these powerful people
are clueless, and corrupt, and
untrustworthy, and they're telling
you to get vaccinated. So the
conclusion, either spoken directly
or left implied, is that
vaccination must therefore be
equally suspect.
America's doctor, Sanjay Gupta, asks
Anthony Fauci
about this exact
study, and whether he's considered
natural immunity as a
factor, and Fauci said, no, I haven't
really thought about that.
There was a study that came out of Israel about
natural immunity, and basically
the headline was that natural immunity
provides a lot of protection, even
better than the vaccines alone.
What are
people to make of that? So
as we talk about vaccine mandates,
I get calls all the time, people say, I've
already had COVID, I'm
protected, and now the study says, maybe
even more protected than the vaccine alone.
Should they also get the vaccine?
How do you make the case to them?
You know, that's a really
good point, Sanjay. I don't have a really
firm answer for you on that.
Which is absolutely absurd
that someone of Fauci's acumen
with his expertise would not
have considered this, and it really
is further evidence that he
will only consider
a big pharma-directed
solution, if we can even call it
a solution.
Because he's not that much
of a hack, he's not that stupid, he knows
exactly what he's doing, and they
don't want to consider this
because it destroys
the big pharma agenda.
So that was journalist
Max Blumenfall there, talking to
Jimmy Dore in the video, Fauci
has no answer why vax people
with natural immunity, which
appears to show the medical advisor to the
president, Dr. Anthony Fauci, having
no answer to why people who have had
COVID before and recovered should
still get vaccinated. And Blumenfall
makes the case that this is a profit
motivated decision on behalf of
big pharma to sell more vaccines
or something. Except, that
clip was cut a little oddly there,
I'm sure you noticed. You see,
Fauci says he doesn't have a firm answer,
but then he does keep talking and
gives an answer to the question.
You know, that's a really good point, Sanjay.
I don't have a really firm answer for you
on that. That's something that we're
going to have to discuss regarding
the durability of the response. The one thing
the paper from Israel didn't
tell you is whether or not as high
as the protection is with
natural infection, what's the durability
compared to the durability
of a vaccine. So it is conceivable
that you got infected, you're protected,
but you may not be protected for an
indefinite period of time. So
one reason that people who have had COVID before
should still get vaccinated, Fauci
argues, is because we aren't yet sure about
the length of time immunity resulting
from an infection of COVID might last.
So in that case, it's still better
to also get the vaccine just
to be safe. Daw and Blumenfall
used this one instance of Fauci
saying he doesn't have a firm answer to
imply that there are no firm answers to
this question, beyond the greed of
the pharmaceutical industry. But this
is not the case. There are answers
to this question, regardless of what
Fauci said in an interview one time.
You know, are they actually interested
in answering this question, or are they
just trying to make Fauci look silly?
So let's have a think about this
question. Blumenfall and Daw
make the case that a study came out
that says so-called natural immunity
is better than vaccine immunity, so
why should people who have so-called
natural immunity still get the vaccine?
You know, beyond the one reason
that we've already seen, that we aren't sure
how long this immunity lasts.
Now firstly, I'd answer, there
are undoubtedly a lot of people out there
who think that they already caught
COVID-19, but haven't.
If someone you're in close contact with
catches it and then you feel sick around
the same time, you might just assume
you have it too and not bother to get tested.
But some of those cases are going
to be colds, flus,
or other illnesses. People who have
misdiagnosed themselves with COVID-19
and they're unknowingly
walking around today with no
immunity, air quotes, natural
or otherwise. Secondly,
tests for COVID can give
false positives. There are also
undoubtedly a lot of people walking around
today who assume they've had COVID
because they tested for it and received
a false positive result.
Relative to the whole population, this won't
be many people, but it will still be a
significant amount. Thirdly,
the study mentioned in Blumenfall and Daw's
video, the one they used to argue that
immunity from catching COVID is better
than vaccine immunity might
be wrong. Blumenfall
mentions in the video that he tweeted
about the article, so I went and
found it, and here it is.
Bombshell preprint study of
76,000 COVID subjects demonstrated
that natural immunity,
so on and so forth. Now, what you might notice
here is the word preprint.
The study mentioned is comparing
SARS-CoV-2 natural
immunity to vaccine-induced immunity,
re-infections versus breakthrough
infections, and if we go to where the study's
hosted, right underneath the title it
says, this article is a preprint
and has not been peer reviewed.
It reports new medical research
that has yet to be evaluated and
so should not be used to guide clinical
practice. And if we click on that
what does this mean link, we get a page
explaining that preprint studies quote
have yet to be evaluated by the medical
community and the information presented
may be erroneous. So this
study compares individuals from
three groups. Those who have had COVID
and recovered from it but are not vaccinated,
those who have had COVID and recovered
from it and are vaccinated,
and those who have just been vaccinated.
And its findings,
remember its early preprint
not peer reviewed findings,
are that so-called natural immunity
is better than vaccine immunity
alone. They come to this conclusion
because they find more breakthrough cases
reported from COVID tests in the vaccinated
group than in the natural immunity
group. So let's talk about a few
ways a study like this might
come to some incorrect or exaggerated
conclusions.
Firstly there's the usual limitations.
It only concerns one
type of vaccine, it only concerns
the delta variant of COVID
and so on. But I want to think about possible
differences in behavior between
the groups that were compared.
As the study itself says, our
results might be affected by differences
between the groups in terms of health behaviors
such as social distancing
and mask wearing, a possible
confounder that was not assessed.
And another health behavior that might
bias the findings of a study like this
is willingness to get retested
for COVID. Because this
study is reporting results largely
from voluntary tests
for COVID. It's possible that
individuals who are vaccinated are
more conscious of the public health,
more personally concerned about
catching COVID and passing it on
and thus are more likely to get tested
in the first place. Maybe people
who have had COVID once and not bothered
to get vaccinated are more likely
to think that they don't have to bother
with retesting for COVID either
since they've already had it. A lot of
asymptomatic or mild cases
of COVID might therefore be being missed
in one group but picked up in the
other. And the study itself comments
on the possibility of missing asymptomatic
infections saying
Additionally, as this is an observational
real world study where PCR
screening was not performed by protocol,
we might be underestimating
asymptomatic infections as these
individuals often do not get tested.
Also, if we attempt
to use this study to dissuade
vaccination, we commit a different
type of sampling error.
Because in terms of whether or not you should get
vaccinated, the groups being compared
by the study are not fit for purpose.
The study defines one group as
previously infected individuals
who have not been vaccinated.
But for our purposes here,
this isn't accurate.
The group is actually previously
infected individuals who have not been
vaccinated and survived
catching COVID the first time
if you follow. If you're wanting
to know if you should get vaccinated,
this group is not a fair comparison to
the vaccinated group because it's
excluding those who caught COVID
and did not recover. The
individuals in this group have been filtered
already. They've had to pass a relevant
health check. That being, if you
get COVID, will you die
and therefore not be able to be
retested in the future? Those
at most risk if they catch COVID,
you know, the people least likely to have
asymptomatic cases, the people most
likely to end up hospitalized,
they've been excluded from this sample
already. You can't compare these
two groups by saying, look, the
unvaccinated people are healthier, so
get vaccinated because you're not
counting all the unvaccinated people
who aren't around to get retested.
Now, did these possible
biasing factors actually influence
the results of the study?
Well, I don't know, honestly.
It's a preprint study. It hasn't been
peer reviewed. But to be clear
here, the study not being peer reviewed
yet doesn't mean it's wrong, necessarily.
Preprint studies can be
very useful, but what we can't
do is say with any degree of certainty
that it is correct. I wouldn't
bet my life or my health on it
being correct, and nor should
anybody else. But for the sake of
the argument, let's imagine this
study is entirely correct.
Now, what would it mean if this
study was entirely correct?
Well, what it would mean is that if
you aren't vaccinated, you should go and
get vaccinated as soon as possible.
Because the study didn't just compare
people with natural immunity to people
with vaccine immunity, it also
looked at people who have both.
And it found that people with both
have the best protection.
You don't even have to read the whole study to find this out.
They put it right there in the conclusions.
Individuals who were both
previously infected and
given a single dose of the vaccine
gained additional protection against
the Delta variant. Max Blumenfall
makes it sound like this is an either
or situation. Either
you have natural immunity, or you
have vaccine immunity, and you can
only have one. But this isn't
how it works. You can both have caught
COVID and gotten vaccinated.
And this paper, even if it's
right, comes to the conclusion that
being vaccinated gives you
additional protection. So
why didn't Blumenfall tweet
bombshell study shows being vaccinated
gives additional protection against
the Delta variant? Why
vax people with natural immunity?
Ask Blumenfall and Jimmy Dore. Well,
I don't know. How about you actually
read the paper that you cite
in your video?
That might be asking a bit much, though,
on YouTube.
Thanks a lot for watching today, folks.
But before I go,
a general disclaimer.
Please do not take medical advice
from YouTube videos, particularly
a ranty comedian's YouTube
videos. As a YouTuber
myself, I know hundreds of
different ways that we can manipulate
facts, present biased narratives,
and just lie to you
and get paid doing it.
You don't even have to be that sneaky.
99% of your audience will
never go and confirm anything you
say. You can just lie
on here. There are no checks.
We are bound to the truth by
zero regulations.
As long as we don't literally break the
law, we can tell you anything
we want with zero repercussions.
And this goes for me, too,
of course. All I can do is
relay to you that medical experts
and medical institutions overwhelmingly
advise vaccination against COVID-19.
And I would ask that
if you're not vaccinated yet, you go
and confirm that information, and
so long as you're able, get
vaccinated. Jimmy Dore likes
to say that everyone will get COVID
eventually, and in preparation for
that, please get vaccinated.
You are much less likely to end up
hospitalized, and you are much less likely
to end up dead from catching COVID-19
if you are vaccinated.
It's vastly safer,
not just for you personally, but
also for anyone you interact with.
And for those who don't like needles,
I completely understand. I
don't like them either, but I've had
two COVID-19 jabs so far
and I honestly didn't even feel
either one of them. And that's
not because I'm so tough, by the way.
I have a very low threshold
for pain. Thank you,
as always, to my patrons, who are
lovely and should be scrolling by right now.
I'll leave a link to my Patreon
in the video description if you'd like to check it
out. Right, that's all from me today,
folks. I'll see you next time.
