Once upon a time, there was this brilliant composer, not the best looking guy.
And one day, this beautiful, young, chestnut-haired, singing and dancing ingenue
floats into his life, and he falls in love with her.
And he decides, I'm going to take you under my wing, and tutor you,
and compose this incredible masterwork for you to star in.
And she was enthralled at first, but then in the end, it didn't work out too well.
I'm talking, of course, about the tragic, torrid tale
of Andrew Lloyd Webber and Sarah Brightman.
During the creation of what would eventually become
the longest-running Broadway show in musical theater history.
Gentlemen!
Lord Andy decided that his version of Phantom of the Opera
would feature the angle of, hey, why don't we look at the things
from the Phantom's point of view, okay?
He has needs, too, alright?
Maybe he's not the best looking guy, but he's a really talented composer,
and he just wants to compose things for his precious lady love,
who is way too young for him, but is maybe kind of talented,
maybe not that talented, but he thinks she's really talented, okay?
But that wasn't so innovative.
Brian De Palma did that, too.
What was Andrew Lloyd Webber's really big innovation?
That huge, million-dollar idea that finally elevates Phantom of the Opera
to blockbuster status is that the Phantom is no longer a golem-y wretch,
but a misunderstood stud, and that Christine's kind of into it.
You could call the stage musical, this stage musical,
a culmination of all of the previous versions,
because it takes inspiration not just from the book,
but almost everything else that came before it.
Phantom continues to be a cultural phenomenon to this day
because of the stage musical, which is still running.
Has your mom been to New York and seen exactly one Broadway show?
She's seen Phantom.
Or The Lion King.
Everyone's mom and all the sad teenage girls love Phantom of the Opera.
Not that I would know.
But in a post-Broadway musical world,
Phantom of the Opera wasn't something like, say, Avatar.
Remember that James Cameron movie?
It wasn't a trend that came and went away.
It's been here pretty steadily for the last 30 years.
And this is honestly kind of difficult to keep this to a character profile,
even more now than the last episode,
because the character is so tied in with the franchise.
But I will try to restrain my tangenting ways.
Here we go.
Phantom of the Opera, after Lloyd Wittman.
I'll start with what you probably already know.
Phantom of the Opera.
Andrew Lloyd Webber's The Phantom of the Opera
is the most financially successful musical in history,
with a worldwide gross nearly twice that of all four of the Transformers movies,
and it is also the longest-running musical in Broadway history.
It won the Tony for Best Musical in 1988,
which beat Into the Woods,
and a lot of musical theater fans are still salty about that.
Poo-poo on the sucker, but let's be real, guys.
There is a reason it's still running.
It's kind of the perfect musical in the same way that, like,
Independence Day is a perfect movie.
Oh, boys!
Civilization will fall, and Phantom of the Opera will still be running.
Watch it close, like, a week after this goes up.
Andrew Lloyd Webber's musical was of course not the last version of Phantom by any stretch,
but all of the weird and wonderful knockoffs we'll be covering today
are inspired by this much more than, say, the Lon Chaney version,
or the Claude Rains version.
After the musical, we start seeing that half-mask,
right here,
as the iconic thing rather than, like, the full mask as we would see before.
Even though the full mask is on the official logo of the Broadway musical,
this comes from the logo being set in stone before the wardrobe was,
and that half-mask,
that was because Michael Crawford's microphone didn't jive with the full mask,
and so the half-mask and the deformity were kind of built around the microphone.
What makes this version work the best
is the fact that the Phantom isn't in it all that much.
A little goes a long way, but when he is in it,
oh, the feelings!
No! Damn you!
Christine unmasks him and he flies into a rage!
This low sim carpoil!
And then for 30 seconds it's like,
blue, blue, blue, please love me,
and then 30 seconds after that, he's fine,
and we're going back upstairs.
And this is one of the things that is so difficult for film adaptations to capture.
The musical format allows these mood swings to work
in a really, really compressed amount of time.
That's part of why Les Mis the musical works so much better
than Les Mis the movie musical,
but we'll get to the movie musical later.
As always, Eric is an emotional mess in the stage musical,
but how this is played, the characterization,
really is based on the actor.
For instance, a guy like Hugh Pinero is more on the
me-he-he-he-I'm-evil end,
and guys like John Owen Jones are more on the
sad puppy end.
Norm Lewis kind of gives him a more dad affect,
and Ramin Karimloo, he just has a lot of feelings, okay?
Don't ever leave me!
Or if you go way back, before the musical,
you get the rock god Phantom Steve Harley.
He was never in the musical, so I can't speak to him much,
although he was originally going to be Michael Crawford,
but then Michael Crawford replaced him.
Sorry, dude.
But that hella electric guitar riff.
Now the musical is the new benchmark,
the new theme to be ripped off,
and suddenly we have a lot more Phantom adaptations
in the wake of a hit Broadway musical.
Hey, it's the mid-80s, and VCRs are becoming
an increasingly popular form of babysitting.
How about Phantom of the Opera for kids?
This is nowhere near as hilarious as it sounds,
except insofar as it had a budget of, like, two,
and the animation is terrible.
While the novel isn't really violent and has zero sex,
it isn't really, you know, interesting to kids either.
So this, rather than being a kiddified version of the book,
is basically just the book.
But boy, did they not have the budget to give him
a scary face or more than five facial expressions.
So since this one's also one of the closest to the books
of all the adaptations,
it gets that I've learned the error of my ways thing in there.
But that is apparently not a terribly satisfactory ending,
so rocks falls and he dies.
Next.
I'm sorry about the way I look.
I know I said I'm not going to go into every post-musical version
because there are a ton, but I have to give a nod
to Phantom of the Mall.
Eric's Revenge.
This is, um, it's actually a horror movie?
Eric with a C is your average sexy high school athlete
with a family who happens to have a house on land
that is coveted by a mall development.
So when Eric's family won't sell,
the mall people will sell the house.
The mall people send a hitman to kill Eric's family by burning
so they could build that mall unfettered.
Morgan Fairchild plays the bad guy.
Pauly Shore is the Persian analog.
And Eric doesn't compose, he works out.
He doesn't use a Punjab lasso, he roundhouse kicks his enemies.
And when Christine wakes up in his lair,
he's not playing the organ.
He's lifting.
Hello, Eric.
That alone deserves a modest slow clap.
Next.
Yes.
People are often surprised to learn that Freddy Krueger himself,
Robert England, starred in this version
at the height of both Nightmare on Elm Street
and the popularity of the Broadway musical.
And it is a shameless ripoff of both.
This one includes the odd element of Christine being a modern
who is like the reincarnation of 1880s Christine.
And she goes back in time to relive the whole Phantom thing.
Why the modern plot is in there, I don't know.
This Eric has sold his soul to the devil.
See, he's a great composer, but the soul selling made him ugg.
So he kills people every few days or so
and sews skin onto his Freddy Krueger face.
He has bad puns like any Freddy Krueger.
And, of course, Freddy Krueger's oh face with his killgasm.
This version is the most evil Phantom
and therefore the least interested in his Christine.
From a filmmaking standpoint, he doesn't seem to want her at all.
They're almost never in the same shot together.
And in this version, he also solicits prostitutes.
My name is Maddie.
You haven't been doing this for very long, have you?
Well, I find this remarkable in that it is the super rare horror movie
where sex workers don't get punished for being sex workers.
This version, on the whole, is surprisingly disappointing,
considering what it is.
Because it's boring, not because it's gross.
But it is really gross.
Where do you live?
When you sing, I live in the heavens.
And when you do not, down below.
From Freddy Krueger, we go to Tywin Lannister.
Yet, before he was the lord of Casterly Rock,
Charles Dance did a turn as the Phantom 2.
This was a TV movie that was based on a musical
by Maury Yeston and Arthur Coppett of Nine fame.
This one's pretty similar to their musical,
minus, you know, being a musical.
And believe it or not, this musical actually predated
Lloyd Webber's version in terms of when it was started.
But for a variety of reasons, it didn't premiere until 1991,
after they produced the TV movie, based on the then-unproduced musical.
And this is honestly one of the better versions.
Ignoring the part where it is way too freaking long.
Seriously, it's three hours.
Dance plays Eric more vulnerable and sensitive than Tywin-y.
I'm just not used to killing people.
Just throw me off a bit.
Once again, there's no Persian.
Instead, he's got a dad.
I mean, he doesn't know that Burt Lancaster is his dad,
but his dad does.
Which kind of detracts from the tragedy a bit.
A lot. It detracts a lot.
Because Eric's not alone.
He's got Burt Lancaster watching out for him the whole movie.
So it's really hard to feel sorry for him
when he's basically living on daddy's credit card under the opera house.
This is also the only version where we don't see his face at all.
Does this work?
Kinda? A little?
Honestly, it feels more like a cop-out.
But it's also the only version where he punches a fake deer in the face.
Let's watch that again.
Dario Argento's Italian horror version,
aka the version with the rat sex scene,
aka the absolute worst one, period.
This one makes the 2004 movie look great.
Remember how in Batman Returns the penguin was raised by sewer penguins?
Well, this phantom was raised by rats.
Also, he's not deformed at all.
Shruggles.
It's an internal kind of ugliness.
I don't know.
I assume he looks normal because the director didn't want to have a hot, steamy sex scene
starring his actual IRL daughter with an uggo.
He's also the only version that just straight-up rapes his Christine,
so he keeps racking up the worst one points.
Worst one.
In fairness, being raised by sewer rats makes a tiny bit more sense than sewer penguins.
Boy, does this phantom love him some rats.
And he will murder you if you come after his rats.
And in the end, Christine's really hot for him, but...
Christine!
Oh, no, not my raised-by-rats rapist.
Okay, but now we're really going to get into it.
You have come here
for one purpose and one alone
Woof.
Joel Schumacher of Batman and Robin fame was always Lord Andy's top choice to direct
because Lord Andy is the grand poobah of terrible decisions
once he's old enough to start drawing Retirement.
And boy could I harp on the technical ineptitude of Joel Schumacher's filmmaking choices
in this shitstorm of a movie, but let's stick to the topic at hand.
And I know a lot of people like this version,
so if you don't want to watch me rag on Gerard Butler for five minutes,
just skip to this timecode here.
The movie adaptation of the Broadway musical features Z-grade Tom Waits impersonator Gerard Butler
as the most bewilderingly miscast phantom yet.
When you look at the other Phantom adaptations, at least some of the worst ones,
at least they knew what they were going for.
They had a vision and they stuck to it.
What the hell were they thinking trying to fit a Gerard Butler-shaped peg
into a person-who-can-sing-shaped hole?
This is the point of no return!
Curse you! You little lying Delilah!
Here is where Gerard Butler belongs.
Or here.
No, no, no.
Yes?
No.
No, God, no.
Okay.
Focus.
Ignoring the fact that the man with the perfect tenor cannot sing,
I wouldn't characterize Butler's Phantom as particularly sexual either,
possibly owing to the fact that our lead actress was underage at the time,
but his Phantom is more of a petulant child.
In no other version, for instance, does he play with dolls.
Like, where did this come from?
Though the relative sexlessness may be part of the draw,
in the same way, you know, Edward Cullen is a draw,
this movie fixes a lot of the logical problems from the musical,
but then creates all new ones.
A big addition in the movie is a sword fight between Eric and Raoul,
which Raoul promptly wins.
God, how did you survive on your own this long, dude?
That shit is caught.
You have been caught.
No, no, apparently not.
Now, let it be war upon you both.
And in the very next scene, Raoul's like,
and now I know how to catch him.
To ensnare our clever friend.
So during the scene featuring Dread Pirate Roberts and the Tango Dancers,
oh God.
This fucking movie.
So, after Dread Pirate Roberts and the Tango Dancers
in front of the PA waving flames in the background,
Christine rips off his full head of hair to reveal another full head of hair
and a deformity that amounts to, like, I don't know,
maybe he had some shellfish that didn't agree with him.
This feisty infection which poisons our love.
She's like, really?
That's what you're all worked up about?
This is your reason for abandoning society?
This is what got you caged and put in a freak show?
Like, you got stung by a bee, you're fine.
You get the impression that Butler knows his deformity is not even really a deformity
because he really tries to compensate with ultra crazy face,
but really nothing compelling or tragic here when she kisses him.
I'm glad you can bear to kiss me despite my pink eye.
And the beat of him letting her go is apparently not enough
to impart his man pain for Joel Schumacher.
Oh no.
This movie ends with him breaking all of the mirrors.
Every single one.
Metaphor.
So, as watchably awful as the 2004 movie is,
the rabbit hole goes deeper still as we reach the coup de grace
of this whole shit show, the piece de resistance.
I mean, the movie did...
Okay.
I mean, it got a theatrical release.
And the show is now the longest running one ever,
so did someone say...
sequel?
Want to dissuade your kids from majoring in musical theater?
Murder that dream in its crib?
Love Never Dies.
The worst musical I've ever seen.
And I've seen Lestat the musical.
Twice.
Ten years on and Eric has apparently jumped ship on living in France
and immigrated to Coney Island
where he owns a theme park slash freaks show slash opera type thing.
And now he's got his empire all set up.
He's ready to lure Christine out in order to win her back
for realsies this time.
The passion.
The romance.
The milking of the giant cow.
Thrill as Eric pours Raoul a drink as their dick wagging contest
enters its second decade.
Real as Eric and Christine sing a song about how they had sex that one time
off screen somewhere.
And I caught you.
And I kissed you.
And I took you.
And I pegged you.
The version you can find on DVD, by the way,
is basically version like 35.6.0
as this show was workshopped a lot.
So this isn't really even the definitive version.
It's just a version.
Instead of The Phantom, he goes by Mr. Why.
Mr. Why welcomes you.
So Christine and the fam come to Coney Island because they need money.
And this might seem petty in the grand scheme of the show's shittiness,
but how does Christine not immediately recognize that something is wrong
when a Tim Burton carriage pulls up with Alan Cumming and Uncle Fester in tow?
Climb aboard.
Did somebody call for a nightmare?
As soon as Eric gets her alone, they sing this ten-minute dirge
about how they had sex once.
As you do.
Then, surprise, guess whose kid that is.
Ten years old.
So, Eric, let's ask the serious question.
What's different from the first musical?
What's missing?
He's a jerkass in both of them, sure.
But in the first one, he's sympathetic because he's deprived.
And while his actions aren't condonable, they are still motivated.
In Love Never Dies, The Phantom has
A. A huge support network.
B. Successful business.
C. Lots of money.
D. Already banged Christine.
E. A fucking kid he didn't even have to raise.
F. Is a massive asshole anyway.
All your progeny may disappear.
Our hero threatens to murder Christine's child.
So romantic.
Leaves are crying.
What a man.
I guess Fifty Shades of Grey fans would like it.
It's like it took everything about the first show that made it work despite itself
and chucked it out the window.
He basically ruins all of the other characters' lives Heathcliff-style.
But he's our hero now.
To be fair, I'm at a loss as to where the story could have gone.
The story of Eric and Christine is done when he lets Christine go.
It is emotionally complete in a way that not many stories are.
Continuing the story of Eric and Christine is just redundant.
It's over.
The mere existence of Love Never Dies makes the story beat of The Phantom
putting someone else's needs before his own.
Just destroys it.
Just gone.
Bye.
Phantom's character arc, in the good versions anyway, is about maturation.
He is a genius in some regards, sure.
But in the realm of interhuman contact, of love, he is a child.
He never made it past toddlerhood.
Now let there be war!
Upon you both!
Now!
Oh sure, just because I'm shooting fireballs at you, you abandon me.
Well fine, I'll kill everybody.
Because he's never been shown love or compassion himself.
Other people are basically toys to him.
That's kind of a thing that happens.
The act of him letting Christine go is the first time in his life
that he really recognizes someone else's humanity.
That act of self-sacrifice, of putting someone else's needs before his own,
is one of the most painful lessons that he or anyone can learn.
That is adulthood.
The world show no compassion to me!
Toxic people are toxic for a reason.
Their lives probably sucked, making them into toxic, abusive opera ghosts.
That does not mean that they are not worthy of love,
or that they cannot learn to be better people.
But just because your life sucked doesn't mean you can march up to people
and declare that they owe you something.
So while many claim that it's this tragic story about repressed sexuality or something,
I don't see it that way.
I see it as a coming-of-age story for a 50-year-old man,
which is why I see Eric voluntarily letting Christine go as such an important character beat.
That is the moment he finally grows up.
The moment he realizes that, yeah, his life has sucked,
but that doesn't give him the license to make people his playthings.
So, f**k Love Never Dies, and it's stupid existing,
but I highly recommend it for your bad movie nights.
It is pretty Larry-awful.
Bad Larry-ous.
So, to conclude, is there a really great version of The Phantom of the Opera?
No.
But there are compelling versions.
Obviously, this is all very subjective,
but because people ask, for my money,
the 25th Anniversary Live at the Royal Albert Hall version
is pretty much the closest to a definitive version you're going to find.
Ramin Karimloo and Sierra Boggess are my favorite Phantom and Christine, respectively,
and here they are at the same time.
And it is far from the deepest musical you're ever going to find,
but I'm just saying, it's still running for a reason.
So, that wraps up my Phantom-opus, maybe?
Like I said, that could go on.
But we're going to move on from that topic.
The voted theme for the next round is
historical people that actually existed and got fictionalized.
Yeah, so here are your options.
Vote well, vote strong.
You can do so here.
You can find out who I pick on my Twitter,
and you can also support me on Patreon,
where you can help me vote on things like
what our next theme for Loose Cannon is going to be.
Thank you very much for watching,
and I will see you next time.
Don't kidnap people.
