The movie The Day After Tomorrow is based very loosely on a hypothesis that increased
global warming will trigger another ice age. It's a theme that's also been taken up by
the media. But in this video, as always, I want to look at the science and compare it
to the hype.
So let's start with Wally Broecker, who postulated that increasing meltwater flowing south from
Greenland would interrupt the Gulf Stream. That's the current that brings warm water
up from the Caribbean to the North Atlantic, and most climatologists agree, keeps Western
Europe warm in winter.
Normally the Gulf Stream gets more salty as water evaporates on the journey northwards.
Since salty water is dense, it sinks in the North Atlantic, forming a deep-sea current
that makes the return journey southwards. This is known as the Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation, or AMOC, which is part of a much larger thermohaline circulation extending
around the world.
And meltwater from Greenland is fresh water. If that mixes with the Gulf Stream, then the
salt content is diluted and the water no longer sinks. The result would be a slowdown or even
a shutdown of the AMOC. Western Europe would experience the same kinds of winters as Canada.
Evidence from the past supports the idea because the same thing has happened several times.
Most recently, at the end of the last glaciation, the probable cause of what's known as the
Younger Dryas was a huge lake of melted ice in North America that burst its banks and
spilled into the Atlantic. Oceanographers say it's likely increasing amounts of meltwater
will begin to slow down the ocean's circulation system, but not in the next few decades. It'll
take at least 100 years for there to be enough meltwater to do that.
Even so, they began to monitor the strength of the Atlantic circulation. In 2005, researchers
at the National Oceanography Centre in Britain surveyed the Atlantic and compared their findings
with records going back to 1957. Now, the figures had to be extrapolated because previous
surveys had recorded different criteria, but the results suggested that the deep current
taking cold water south had slowed 30%. The tabloid press, of course, immediately hyped
the story.
Is Britain on the brink of a new ice age? asked one British newspaper.
The body of the story answered the question unequivocally, as the Gulf Stream that warms
our shores falters was the first line. The story went on. This week's news that the Gulf
Stream has abruptly begun to weaken could be one of the most important and most devastating
scientific observations ever to hit the headlines. Researchers at the National Oceanography Centre
in Southampton, who have measured the strength of the current far out into the Atlantic,
have found that it has slowed by a massive 30%. But there was no data to show whether
the slowdown, even if it was real, was anything abnormal or permanent. Science is sceptical
by nature. Most scientists don't jump to conclusions, especially based on just one
inconclusive study. realclimate.org, a blog run by climate scientists, warned that while
continued monitoring of this key climatic area is clearly warranted, the imminent chilling
of Europe is a ways off yet. Gavin Schmidt, a climate modeller at the Goddard Institute
for Space Studies, and Richard Woods, chief oceanographer at the Hadley Centre in Britain,
both said the same thing, that a decline in circulation should have produced a decline
in European surface temperatures, but it hadn't. So it's likely that even the result itself
was erroneous. Robert Dixon of the British Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture
Science told the New York Times that much more data was needed to determine whether
a slowdown was underway. Even Harry Brydon, lead author of the study, was cautious about
his own results. He told news scientists he wasn't yet sure if the change was temporary
or signals a long-term trend. But caution and caveats are not what sell news stories.
Critics of the anthropogenic climate change theory often accuse the media of alarmism,
and this is a prime example. When Brydon and his colleagues checked newly installed sensors
a few months later as part of a follow-up study, the results were more ambiguous.
We've got a variable signal, but it's too early to detect any trends, Brydon told news
scientists, in a story titled No New Ice Age for Western Europe. You couldn't get a clearer
headline than that. Carl Wunsch, an oceanographer at MIT, was quoted as saying, it's a complicated
story reduced to a fairy tale. And yet the mainstream media was still fixated on the
idea of an imminent shutdown. Sea change, why global warming could leave Brydon feeling
the cold, was the headline in The Guardian. In 2007, the full results of the follow-up
study were published. And it confirmed the preliminary 2006 results, showing a huge variation
in the speed of the thermohaline circulation. Even if the 30% slowdown found in 2005 was
real, it could easily be part of this natural variation, which is what prominent climate
scientists had been saying all along. Then in March 2010, researchers from NASA's Jet
Propulsion Laboratory used other data to measure the circulation, including satellite altimetry,
and found no significant change between 2002 and 2009. So the Daily Mail fearlessly busted
the media's Ice Age fearmongering. New climate change myth! Gulf Stream is not slowing down.
Fears that global warming will shut down the Gulf Stream and plunge Britain into a mini
Ice Age are unfounded, a study shows. Some environmentalists have argued that global
warming could shut off the stream, sending temperatures spiralling down across Europe
as they rise elsewhere. Hang on, it was the media that was telling us that global warming
would shut off the Gulf Stream, and they didn't get that from environmentalists. If the Daily
Mail wants to name and shame those who created the myth, it should start with this piece
of hysterical nonsense from 2005. Okay, who printed it? Why, shock horror, it was the
Daily Mail. Obviously, in its outrage that we'd all been hoodwinked by yet another myth,
the Mail forgot that it had helped start the myth five years earlier with this kind of
scaremongering rubbish. Without the Gulf Stream, Britain would be scarcely habitable, its broad
acres would turn to tundra, and winter temperatures would plunge to minus 20 degrees centigrade.
The Daily Mail could easily have checked with climate scientists to see if this was at all
likely. It could have read the science media, which managed to get the story right. Instead,
it drew its own conclusions based on a limited understanding of the scientific method and
ramped up the hype. It is hard to imagine the devastating effect such a climatic flip
would have on our tightly populated islands, and on the world as a whole. Civilization
could scarcely survive it. Now, five years on, the Daily Mail is railing against a myth
of its own making. The idea that a slowdown of the ocean currents would trigger such a
rapid change in climate is pure fantasy, explained Dr Willis. Well, yes. But four years earlier,
Carl Wunsch had told news scientists exactly the same thing, except he had called it a
fairy tale. Where was the Daily Mail then? I guess reporters were too busy having one
last shag in anticipation that civilization was about to end. The Daily Mail wasn't the
only one to help create a myth, then turn around five years later to disown it, and
have the Schutzpah to blame someone else. Britain's Daily Telegraph also went overboard
on Brydon's 2005 study. The discovery has alarmed scientists because ancient climate
records show that northern air temperatures can drop by up to 10 degrees centigrade within
decades of the circulation slowing, or even stopping. But despite quoting two experts
in the story, the Telegraph failed to find a single one who said he was alarmed. The
alarm seemed to be sounded by the Telegraph itself. The changes in the Atlantic currents
would cause average temperatures over Britain to fall by up to 6 degrees centigrade in as
little as 20 years. No prizes for guessing the Telegraph's stance five years on, when
it had to report that scientists were not predicting any such thing. Research suggests
that fears that Britain could be plunged into an ice age by a waning Gulf Stream are unfounded.
The findings call into question theories proposed by some environmentalists that global warming
could shut down the stream, causing temperatures to fall dramatically in Europe. But this theory
isn't proposed by some environmentalists. The Telegraph based its story on a study by
the Oceanography Centre, which it didn't understand, and then added its own speculation
based on a poor understanding of climate science. Broca's theory, actually a hypothesis, has
remained unchanged and unchallenged throughout this saga, and it doesn't say we're about
to be plunged into another ice age. The smokescreen and spin put out by some of the media, whether
they're hyping the science or trying to undermine it, make it harder and harder to get across
the reality that's turning up in the research. Oceanographers say a slowdown of the thermohaline
circulation is at least 100 years away, although that depends on the Greenland ice sheet continuing
to melt at the current rate. Many glaciologists say it's likely to accelerate. Even if and
when it happens, not one of the models predicts what the Daily Mail and the Daily Telegraph
call an ice age. You know, Britain scarcely habitable, civilisation scarcely surviving
it. Oceanographers say the world isn't facing the same situation it did 12,500 years ago,
when it was coming out of a glaciation and global temperatures were much cooler. So even
if and when a slowdown happens, the Mail's prediction that another ice age would cover
Britain in permanently frozen soil is nothing more than tabloid journalists drawing their
own conclusions. Does all this sound familiar? The 1970s myth about an imminent ice age was
also largely the work of the media, for which scientists are now getting the blame. How
long do you think before people are proclaiming the Daily Mail a champion of truth for busting
a myth that those fraudulent scientists started?
