Miss Ellis, my firm represents Addison Cain.
We are aware of your recent YouTube video and other postings related to lawsuits involving
my client.
In your video, you used my client's copyrighted content and made numerous false claims including
statements from allegations made in the lawsuits that were not based on evidence or facts.
These false statements include the following allegations.
1. That my client claimed to own tropes and that was what the DMCA's at issue were about.
2. That my client blackmailed Zoe Ellis.
3. That Miss Cain's publisher settled due to Miss Cain's perjury in Oklahoma.
4. That Miss Cain committed perjury and 5. That the other lawsuits in Virginia died for
unrelated reasons.
These statements are entirely false and defamatory.
No proof was ever provided by Miss Ellis or her company in the lawsuits about any of these
issues.
While my client was accused of perjury by Miss Ellis' company, the basis of that claim
was never argued before court and Miss Cain never misrepresented any facts to the court.
Her previous publisher filed the DMCA's and no DMCA's were sent by Miss Cain to Oklahoma.
An accurate account of the various lawsuits may be viewed on my client's Facebook page
if you are interested in a factual account instead of spreading the previous lies and
inaccuracies spread by Quill, Zoe Ellis, Courtney Milan and others.
We believe that your video violates the terms and services of your Patreon account as it
clearly includes abusive content and uses my client's content.
My client is currently receiving threats, hate mail, and other harassing posts due to
your video.
We demand that you remove or correct the video immediately.
Regards, Tina Watson
Welcome back.
Now, if you didn't see my previous video about the so-called Omegaverse lawsuit, I suggest
you go ahead and do that now.
It's Tiger King for her.
And also, engage with it.
Give it a like.
Give it a comment.
Because the algorithm was not kind to that one and it did not show up in most subscribers'
recommendations.
Hmm.
Weird.
In fact, while you're here, go ahead and give this a like.
Give it a comment.
Give it several comments.
Get in fights in the comments.
Drive that engagement.
Because this...
Well, I don't want to say this is war, but...
Honey, you've got a big storm coming.
Now let me start by saying that I had never intended to make this video at all.
Like most of my videos, except for Game of Thrones, which I will die mad about.
Your lips are moving and you're complaining about something.
That's whinging.
That was supposed to be one and done.
But then someone had to go and get me involved in the whole thing.
Now one way or the other, I had to take September off in order to finish revisions on my second
book, which is out next fall.
It's called Truth of the Divine.
You can...
Well, not available for pre-order yet.
I don't know.
I'll pimp it later.
But also, a lot went down in the month of September and there was a lot of documentation
that I had to go through in order to cobble together as coherent a narrative as I'm about
to attempt to make.
Now before we get started, a note.
Yes, despite my costume, this is not theater.
This is all real.
This is really happening.
And that also said, Addison Cain and I are both regrettably, technically, public figures.
Now that said, despite my request that you do not harass this woman from the last video,
some of you were shitty anyway.
And I get that we're all bored and losing our minds and that like, you know, cancelling
is fun now.
But again, I'd like to ask you to not.
Like this guy.
Like, we don't need to bring her shitty book into it.
I know I'm not on the hook if any of you idiots post cringe in her ats or on her Facebook
page, but it is, as the kids say, a bad look.
Now that said, with regard to the last video, I feel like I was pretty even-handed with
the criticisms I made and the conclusions I drew.
And I definitely withheld a lot of criticisms and comments about Addison Cain because I
was concerned that they might be a little unnecessarily mean.
But trust, I feel no such obligation this time.
So before we get into this, a refresher on the Dramatis Personae.
Addison Cain, not her real name, erotica author who claims to have spearheaded the concept
of Het Omegaverse, or ABO, and who has a knack for accusing her fellow authors of plagiarism
because her ideas are just that good.
Because I am your alpha.
It was almost a roar.
You want to be f***ed by me.
Do you understand?
Zoe Ellis, also not her real name and one of the alleged plagiarists, who in 2018 sued
Addison Cain for alleged abusive DMCA takedown notices.
She is also, in my opinion, correct.
Those takedown notices were illegal and abusive.
Blushing Books, Addison Cain's former publisher, who gleefully threw themselves in front of
the bus for Addison Cain during the lawsuit, only to be hilariously betrayed by her and
backstabbed later, and she hates them now, and they are also on her eternity quest for
revenge.
Patreon.
Yes, really.
The crowdfunding website that my company relies on for most of our income.
YouTube.
This hell space.
The Electronic Frontier Foundation.
The leading legal non-profit defending digital privacy, free speech, and innovation that
I plugged at the end of the last video.
And also my lawyers.
Taniyah Watson, a lawyer, shown here getting brunch with her client Addison Cain in a public
Facebook post that somebody wanted me to see.
Actually several posts.
Like, yeah, you know, I'm just getting lunch with my lawyer, you know, so just some girls
talking about copyright law, gal pals.
So that crazy month of September, what happened?
So the video went public early on September 3rd.
I was trying to get away from it, again, that was supposed to be revision month.
But later that day, I get this email from Taniyah Watson saying all that weird shit.
Like yes, I am a barred lawyer in the state of Oklahoma.
If you want the truth, go to my client's Facebook page.
Why should you go to jail for a crime someone else noticed?
You don't need double talk.
You need blah blah blah.
Blah blah blah.
No habla espanol.
The thing about it is, this email didn't have any, like, thread of litigation in it.
It wasn't like, take it down or else, or take it down or we'll sue.
It was just take it down, gal pals.
So I decided to milk that for some content because it was indeed very funny.
I posted it to Twitter and decided to move on.
But of course, that was not the end of it.
The following day, I get an email from the head of legal at Patreon, Colin Sullivan.
You see, Addison Cain has sent a DMCA takedown notice to Patreon demanding that I take the
post about Omegaverse down.
Honestly, yeah, I was kind of surprised.
Like, the entire video was about how dumb and abusive and transparently flimsy her DMCA
case was.
But shh, we're still doing this, I guess.
So what Addison Cain apparently even failed to consider is that, unlike companies like
Amazon and YouTube, Patreon is not a giant faceless conglomerate.
Not only am I one of Patreon's top creators, so of course they're going to investigate
any wrongdoing I'm accused of, they also took the time to watch the video and found the
whole situation a touch ironic.
So I talked with the legal team at Patreon for a while.
We discussed some options and what we decided was that they, in order to not be on the hook
legally just in case litigation came down the pike, we will honor that DMCA takedown
notice.
And all that meant was I had to unlink the YouTube URL from the Patreon post for 10 days
and then relink it.
So I send the DMCA counter notice and Patreon basically tells Addison Cain and her lawyer
that they have 10 days to sue me or I can do whatever I want with the content.
And here's the thing, despite my years and years of doing this, I've never actually gotten
a DMCA takedown notice before.
But here's the other thing, Patreon was so, I guess the word was offended that she thought
this would work, that they were like, hey, if you were to, I don't know, end up in court
one way or the other, we would stand behind you and, you know, maybe fund your legal fees.
Like that would be a first.
Now during this whole time, despite all of these behind the scenes machinations, publicly
she's weirdly quiet about the whole thing.
She has to this date not said anything on her Twitter or her public Facebook or her
private Facebook.
However, on September 5th, rather than say something about me, she instead redirects
her ire and her fans to another author.
And we will get to that too.
And although I cannot say for certain that she had anything to do with this, other strange
goings on happened with that video and my channel in general.
Somebody reported the ads as having violence and terrorism in it and full nudity and YouTube
review was like, yeah, that checks out.
So I had to demonetize the thing.
Someone reported the URL to Twitter, meaning that sometimes when the URL popped up, it
would be clocked as not safe.
And someone was reporting the video, meaning that it was age restricted as recently as
last week since lifted.
But maybe that's all just a huge coincidence, even though none of those things have ever
happened to me before.
In my 10 years of doing this, big old coincidence.
During this time, Addison Cain also hires a PR person.
And on September 9th, she emails entertainment journalist Kaylee Donaldson asking if she
wants to softball an interview with Addison Cain.
Kaylee, of course, posted this email to Twitter and it was very funny.
We privately speculated that it was maybe because she was a known fan of the morally
questionable monster love genre.
But because of that, one of the very last book reviews she did was of my book.
So I know what you're all thinking.
She sends a DMCA takedown notice to Patreon, but not to YouTube.
Why?
And we puzzled over this.
Why go for Patreon?
The content is not hosted on Patreon.
It's hosted on YouTube and Nebula.
Well, it turns out she did go for YouTube.
On Friday, September 11th, I get an email from YouTube saying, hey, someone sent us
a DMCA takedown notice.
We looked into it and we think it's bogus.
Because we think this probably falls under fair use.
So we're going to ignore it.
I have never heard of this ever happening, of YouTube actually getting a DMCA takedown
notice and saying, no.
Because as we discussed in the last video, that puts YouTube possibly legally liable
if Wolfcock Karen decides to start suing people.
But as we have already learned, when a platform gets a DMCA takedown notice, they have to
send the notice to the person being accused of copyright infringement.
Meaning, I got the letter that Addison Cain sent YouTube and...
To whom it may concern.
The work infringed is not fair use.
My book is not public domain.
It is a creative work, not a textbook.
The poster reads my books to degrade my work.
This is not fair use of a copyrighted work, nor was this video a review of my work.
It was a personal attack.
The poster significantly transformed my original work, both by altering the work and by mocking
it for the poster's financial gain via YouTube and Patreon.
Monetizing the video does not make this fair use.
Furthermore, this poster, in regards to her video, refers to the necessity of blurring
out the face of my child as DAMN BABY on Twitter.
Tweet attached.
The baby in question's safety has already been threatened via the lawsuit this video
monopolizes upon.
Photos of my daughter and how to find my address under my real name, not pseudonym,
were made public.
Those documents were sealed by the court.
I feel Lindsay Ellis is a menace, a threat to my child, and is monetizing defamation
for personal, financial gain.
Oh, I am gonna milk the shit out of that.
Alright, let's, uh, break this bat-shittery down, shall we?
Yes, I'm still wearing the falsies.
Like, this is as much effort as you're gonna get look-wise.
This isn't ContraPoints.
Because I don't want this to be an hour of pwnage.
This is an opportunity.
We can make this a learning experience.
So, uh, let's break this apart.
My book is not public domain.
It is a creative work, not a textbook.
Copyrighted material is copyrighted material, whether it's an educational textbook or
wolf porn.
That said, the sum total of Kane's work that we used was about 400 words.
Um, about two minutes out of an hour-long video.
The poster reads my books to degrade my work.
This is not fair use of a copyrighted work, nor was this video a review of my work.
Yeah, I don't really do reviews.
Uh, fair use actually encompasses a lot more than that.
That said, we didn't just include copyrighted material for shits and giggles.
We included it in order to give examples of the content that was being fought over.
It was a personal attack, framed around two lawsuits filed against me personally, in which
the poster did not like the outcomes in court.
I mean, I know it feels personal, maybe, but I didn't say anything about Addison Kane
outside of what was relevant to the court case.
The reason I came down the way I did was because I looked at the evidence and was like, hmm,
there's kind of a clear right and wrong side here.
That said, we seem to be in disagreement of what the outcomes even were, and I'll get
to that later.
Furthermore, my work has been altered, words blacked out, thus creating work product the
poster did not have permission to create.
I, uh, I don't usually ask for permission.
When people talk about fair use, they usually restrict it to educational purposes, criticism,
and parody, and they don't seem to think that it can exist outside of that, but it actually
does go further.
The other key word here is transformative, and that's sort of the ironic thing with her
letter at all, is she's upset that I did a dramatic reading of her work and blacked out
some of the words, thereby transforming it, lending more credence to fair use.
Monetizing the video does not make this fair use.
Uh, it doesn't actually have anything to do with whether it's monetized or not.
Like, it being commercial kind of works against the argument, but you can monetize things
and it still be fair use, you know, reviewers and critics have careers.
Now the reason why monetizing your content can work against fair use isn't because, like,
it's, you know, commercial and nonprofits are better or more moral or something.
It has to do with the market for the original copyrighted material.
The standard when you make money off of someone else's copyrighted material is does this substitute
or destroy the original market?
And a YouTube video about a court case isn't going to substitute the market for erotica.
Does my monetizing this content destroy her market?
And the answer is obviously no.
The only way you could argue that I would harm the market is if I made the book look
bad by saying it's bad and that's fair use.
There's nothing you can do about that.
Criticism does not count as destroying the market, uh, even though I didn't actually
criticize her dumb book.
But while we're on this subject, I did have some empathy for Addison Cain before the video
went up because as a New York Times bestselling author, I do actually know what it's like
for people to shit on your book and monetize them shitting on your book.
I know what it's like for some of these people to shit on your book while getting tens of
thousands of views.
And if you want to go outside the book stuff, I know what it's like for a lot of people
to personally target me to the tune of hundreds of thousands, if not millions of views.
It sucks.
It really fucking sucks.
But here's the thing, it's not copyright infringement and technically it's not illegal.
I can't really even claim that it's defamation, which is ironic because every time one of
those dipshits videos get taken down, they think I did it like I've even fucking watched
any of them.
No one cares about your response video, Gary.
But that is the thing.
People can monetize themselves saying shit about you that you don't like.
And if you're a public figure, there is not a lot you can do about it unless they say
something that is objectively, patently untrue.
And even then, it's still an uphill battle.
Sucks, huh?
So as I said, no, I did not actually think that the subject of a video that I made about
a person known for making bad faith DMCA takedown notices would make a bad faith takedown DMCA
but I don't know, maybe there's, I don't know, there's some, I feel like there's a term for
this.
Some sort of effect.
I just, I don't know, I've been listening to the wavy word of the mind.
Okay, let's look at the allegations.
That my client claimed to own tropes and that was what the DMCA's at issue were about.
No I didn't.
Two, that my client blackmailed Zoe Ellis.
Wow, no, no I didn't even a little bit allege that.
I don't know where the hell you got that.
That Miss Kane's publisher settled due to Miss Kane's perjury in Oklahoma.
Yeah, about the perjury thing, I guess you could say I implied it, but I didn't say it.
I did say what actually did happen was that the plaintiff accused Kane of perjuring herself
and then three days later, a judgment was filed by the court.
And this was one mistake I did make.
You see, there was no settlement.
It was not a settlement.
It was a judgment.
A judgment is an official designation that is entered on a court's docket that designates
that a plaintiff has prevailed against the defendant in a court case.
Plaintiff in the Oklahoma case, Quill Inc.'s books, prevailed over the defendant blushing
books.
There was no settlement.
That was my mistake.
Sorry, Addison.
But the other lawsuits in Virginia died for unrelated reasons.
It did close for unrelated reasons.
The Oklahoma case was closed after blushing books, admitting wrongdoing, and the Virginia
case was closed for lack of prosecution.
These things had nothing to do with each other.
They were completely unrelated.
But one thing I have not really touched on yet is the letter that Tanya Watson had sent
to Patreon.
To whom it may concern.
My firm represents Addison Cain.
Miss Cain is a well-known author.
Recently, one of your users posted co-
Okay, here's the thing.
It's not substantive enough to be, like, you know, fun to read the way the other one was,
so I'm just gonna break it down.
Due to the content, my client has received hate mail and attacks on social media.
I have a good faith belief that the material I am reporting is not authorized by the copyright
owner, an agent of the owner, or the law.
If you really do have a good faith belief that this is copyright infringement, I find
it interesting that you would mention defamation or harassment at all, because those things
do not have anything to do with whether or not my use of the 400 words of Born to be
Bound was copyright infringement.
Lens v. Universal Music Corp. 2016, the fair use of a copyrighted work for purposes such
as criticism, comment, news reporting, or teaching is not an infringement, and is therefore
wholly authorized by the law.
Recently, one of your users posted content that includes excerpts of my client's work
that were posted without her permission, along with numerous false claims and defamatory
statements.
It does not work like that.
You hurt my feelings, ipso facto copyright infringement.
That's not how copyright works.
Copyright infringement is infringement whether your feelings are hurt or not.
I actually kind of like this wolf hat.
I'm like, I'm going to start wearing this.
It's got pockets.
None of my clothes do.
Paws.
Furry solidarity.
So that's just me, but what about everybody else?
What about the other, um, I don't want to say victims, targets of Addison Cain's disdain,
shall we say?
Well, first and most obvious is Zoe Ellis, who filed the original lawsuit, who alleges
that Cain's publisher at the direction of Cain filed dozens of DMCA takedown notices.
Is that specific enough for you?
I mean, she does also allege that Cain herself sent some of them, but we're keeping it simple.
But that wasn't all there was to it when we're talking about the defamation side of the lawsuit.
Basically, Ellis also alleges that Cain spent a lot of time and effort shit-talking her
to the community.
And since we're talking about self-published erotica, authors kind of live and die a lot
more on networking than they do on the traditional side.
And so if Addison Cain is running around in all these like Omegaverse Facebook groups
saying like, hey, this woman is plagiarizing me, that's kind of a bad look for the accused.
Then there is an author, Nora Ashe, who was an early proponent of Zoe Ellis when she was
first entering authoredom.
And this is another mistake slash redaction I need to make.
Patricia Briggs, who I said was the first Omegaverse author, was not actually that.
She wrote kind of werewolfy stuff.
You know, there was like some, obviously it was called Alpha and Omega, but like it didn't
have most of the tropes that we associate with ABO.
The first hit commercial Omegaverse author was Nora Ashe, not Addison Cain.
Part of her crime was being an early champion of Zoe Ellis, but another part of it was the
fact that she repeatedly pointed out that she was the first commercially published Omegaverse
hit author.
God, this is like, the specificity is really important in the erotica wars, okay?
Anyway, Nora Ashe alleges that Cain also threw her clout around to damage her brand within
the author community.
And then there's Lee Savino.
And now we're getting into like the really wild shit.
Lee Savino does not write ABO.
She's more in the vein of dark werewolfy romance sort of thing.
Also a former friend of Addison Cain, as so many of these women are.
And I'm not exactly clear on when Addison Cain decided that Lee Savino was actually
in the enemy's camp, in this grand conspiracy against her.
But the long and short is that Cain decided that Lee Savino knew damning things about
Zoe Ellis and Nora Ashe.
And so she subpoenaed Lee Savino in her counterclaim in the Virginia lawsuit.
So you remember how earlier I mentioned that she didn't say anything about my video, but
instead redirected her ire to another author?
Well, this is that author, and here's what she said.
It is extremely expensive to subpoena someone in a lawsuit.
Myself and my reputable attorneys would never do so frivolously or vindictively.
Regrettably, we were forced to subpoena Lee Savino because she has in her possession highly
relevant information to the lawsuit brought against me.
There is a reason she was subpoenaed.
She and I are both aware of it, and if she continues to make inflammatory statements
against my character, I will make what I know public.
Thing is, I do have a copy of that subpoena, and I have absolutely no problem making public
what she thinks is such a big deal.
Of course, it was like long-winding conspiratorial nonsense, but the long and short is that she
demanded that Lee Savino produce all documents relating to Margarita Cole, Eva Dresden, and
remember those names, we'll get to them, Addison Cain, Zoe Ellis, and Nora Ash.
The latter two, again, are both in the UK and are harder to get information on.
Oh, but that's not all.
Lee Savino is also a plagiarist, but she didn't copy a plot.
She copied a, uh, character.
So here's part of the letter that Tammy Watson sent Lee Savino when they were forced to drop
the counterclaim in Virginia.
We are writing to inform you that my client has decided to move to dismiss her counterclaim
in the above-referenced lawsuit.
My client wishes to put these matters behind her and would appreciate if your client would
either return the witch character at issue and remove her from Miss Savino's Berserker
series.
Return the witch!
Considering the history and Miss Savino's use of my client's character, we request that
Miss Cain's books are no longer used as the inspiration for ghostwriters to emulate.
Like I cannot read her mind, I don't know what's in her heart, but according to her,
this is a character she's been writing for like 10 years and she has no idea where Cain
decided that this character and this character alone was plagiarized from one of Cain's books.
Oh, and Addison Cain also accused Savino of reporting her Facebook ads to Facebook as
being inappropriate.
Huge, if true.
Then there's author Ava Dresden, also an author in this community, also subpoenaed in the
Virginia case, basically the exact same shit, like give me dirt on this, this, this, and
this person.
So Dresden takes this seriously and has to hire a lawyer and ends up spending a ton of
money on this whole nonsense thing only to have Cain drop the subpoena when Quill gets
dismissed from the Virginia case for lack of prosecution.
Courtney Milan is not an Omegaverse author, but is fairly well known in the more traditional
historical romance community.
And so Milan basically got involved in this when someone reached out to her like, hey,
you're a lawyer, what do you think of this whole thing?
And Milan looked at it and she opined on Twitter basically that she thought Cain was in the
wrong and this is obviously not plagiarism, it's just too broad, it's too tropey, this
is sans affair, this is not how plagiarism works.
And so Milan, a person that Cain has never really interacted with or talked to, is now
also on the list of eternity vengeance quest.
Here she is harassing Milan on Twitter, here she is dragging Milan on her personal Facebook.
I have been one of Courtney Milan's favorite punching bags over the years.
Why?
In the beginning, I didn't know.
I still don't know why she was comfortable saying the things she said without any form
of proof or taking the time to afford a fellow human the courtesy of due diligence.
Authors are afraid of Courtney Milan, and I understand why better than most.
To all the others she has bullied without respecting the community and seeking fact,
I am so sorry.
I know what it feels like to be trampled, ignored, and attacked for sport, but we don't
need to be afraid of bullies.
Not when we have each other.
Not when we have kindness and the support of a community we love.
Not when we have THE TRUTH.
Hashtag RWA.
Hashtag stand up to bullying.
Here's Toni Watson mentioning her in her letter to me.
The previous lies and inaccuracies spread by Quill, Zoe Ellis, Courtney Milan, and others.
And here is the formal ethics complaint Cain filed against Courtney Milan with the Romance
Writers of America.
Formal Ethics Complaint against Courtney Milan to Romance Writers of America.
To whom it may concern, I have recently learned that Courtney Milan serves on the RWA Ethics
Committee.
The high level of trust authors must place in the RWA to operate with integrity leads
me to file this complaint against Ms. Milan for poor and unethical behavior.
On March 12, 2019, Courtney Milan posted statements about me and a lawsuit against
me to her 37.9k Twitter followers after I was sent to her by the RWA for assistance.
These posts were not based on fact or evidence, but merely on the allegations in a lawsuit
which had just been initiated.
And as someone who markets herself as a legal expert, she did not take the time to research
the allegations she recklessly tweeted.
Thanks to Courtney's carelessness, unsubstantiated slander was spread to the point I received
threatening messages.
After her tweets, many members of the community I loved and dedicated readers turned on me,
taking her factually unsupported posts at face value.
Once again, I request RWA sanction Courtney Milan and remove her from the Ethics Board
and any affiliation with RWA.
Sincerely, Addison Cain, Membership ID 31817.
Is there no manager she won't complain to?
To be clear, all of this sturm und drang is because Courtney Milan, who has a pretty solid
base of legal knowledge, expressed an opinion about the court case on Twitter.com.
She never said anything about Cain as a person.
So what's funny to me about this Twitter exchange is that Milan, despite having a law degree,
can't really understand what's going on because she's not a barred lawyer, meaning she's not
practicing, but Addison Cain, who thinks monetizing content exempts it from fair use, is the legalist
expert that ever legaled.
Oh, but one other funny thing that happened just as I was editing this is I got an email
from Courtney Milan saying, hey, I actually remembered who it was that originally reached
out to me about the Omegaverse lawsuit.
And wouldn't you know, it was Addison Cain.
Well, that backfired.
Margarita Cole.
This is Zoe Ellis's lawyer.
Now Cole is a lawyer that represents a lot of authors in like IP and like rights and
stuff.
She's like that kind of lawyer, formerly a bankruptcy lawyer.
This comes into it, believe it or not.
Now, according to Cole, she originally got involved with Zoe Ellis by getting onto one
of her mailing lists.
And then eventually they started talking about rights and stuff.
Then Zoe Ellis reached out to her whenever she started getting all these DMCA takedown
notices.
Now I bring this whole up because Cain has repeatedly alleged that Margarita Cole has
had like this weird, obsessive vendetta against Addison Cain for years, saw an opportunity
with Zoe Ellis and all these DMCA takedowns and is therefore the mastermind of this whole
thing.
And kind of like Milan, she's does the thing where she's like, well, you're a bankruptcy
lawyer.
How can you possibly know about copyright infringement?
And this is kind of a running theme with Cain's aspersions against people.
Like Milan isn't barred, therefore she cannot opine on the whole case unless it's in favor
of Cain.
And Margarita Cole doesn't know what she's doing because she was a bankruptcy lawyer
at some point in history, even though she's not anymore.
Oh, but that's not all.
Blushing Books and Addison Cain alleges Margarita Cole, covering my ass, has filed three bar
complaints against this woman over the last two years.
And I know I have to say alleged to cover my ass, but like I do have a copy of one of
these bar complaints and it was Blushing that filed it and it was during the freaking
lawsuit.
So they filed a bar complaint against an opposing lawyer as ongoing litigation was happening.
Ethics.
And again, it is this sort of conspiracy, like she read an art she didn't like and she's
been trying to take down Addison Cain for years.
And also she's got like 80 sock puppets and here are examples of all of them, ergo bar
complaint.
And again, according to Cole, a new bar complaint was filed by Addison Cain on August 26, 2020.
Less than two months ago.
And finally, surprisingly, Blushing Books.
So Blushing has alleged that Addison Cain was the person who reported them to the RWA
and is therefore the reason they are on advocacy alert.
Now we reached out to the RWA to confirm that and they declined to comment because they
don't give names for that sort of thing.
But based on an email that Blushing sent to Courtney Milan, the only romance lawyer,
they do believe it was Cain.
And of course, Cain made all sorts of wild allegations against Blushing, including like
book burning and breach of contract, bit, bit, bit, bit, bit.
How many of you have ever felt personally victimized by Regina George?
So why bring all of this up?
Well, originally, this video was meant to be sort of a learning experience about copyright.
But obviously this isn't about copyright.
Some people just want other people to shut up.
And sometimes she uses copyright law to do it.
But most of the time she doesn't like the way she uses this word defamation just so
eagerly.
I'm reminded of the way that El Presidente is just so eager to expand libel laws in the
US to be like the ones in the UK.
So really, this isn't even about copyright law anymore.
And it never was.
It's about deplatforming.
Cain has people she doesn't like.
She wants to deplatform them.
Just sometimes she uses the DMCA to do it.
And I think this is really interesting because while I think she's wrong and is definitely
abusing systems that are in place to protect people, it does kinda highlight a major problem,
which is that platforms don't really care about abuse.
They don't care about harassment.
And before you go there Addison, no, by no meaningful definition, legal or ethical, does
this count as defamation, abuse, or harassment.
Dammit.
However, as someone who has multiple times been on the wrong side of coordinated harassment
campaigns and is also friends with people who have gone through way, way worse, including
having to move, sometimes move cities, I feel like I can say with some certainty that platforms
don't take harassment seriously.
But you know what they do take seriously?
Copyright.
As if for instance, here again we have the President of the United States sharing a bad
meme using Nickelback's photograph.
Well Nickelback was successful in getting that tweet taken down because they filed a
DMCA takedown.
Similarly, there are examples of counter-protesters blasting copyrighted music at alt-right rallies
so it can't get uploaded in its raw form and will also therefore be taken down.
Which, while effective, also swings in the other direction because counter-protesters
have been known to do that to, for instance, BLM using the exact same tactic.
The pendulum swings both ways, and even in the Nickelback case, while ethically good
for them, I honestly don't think that counts as copyright infringement.
It's a dumb shitty meme, but I think that, personally, it's transformative enough that
it would count as fair use.
If it were taken to court, oh god, I'm imagining that, no, please, no.
So it really is no wonder that there are people who feel like copyright law and the DMCA is
a perfectly valid way to suppress speech they don't like.
Both Addison Cain and her lawyer, Shania Watson, say as much in their DMCA complaints.
And neither Addison nor her lawyer seem to care that it doesn't matter why you want the
infringing material taken down.
Copyright exists to protect your share of the market, not to protect you from defamation
or things that might make you look bad.
Hey, Angelina, what the hell is taking so long with this edit?
Yeah, uh, sorry, sorry, um, I've just been so busy with my damn baby that it's just starting
to take over my brain.
It's like how you can't call your damn baby a damn baby unless you are, like, the most
wretched person in the world, and not like you're a mom who's constantly overloaded with
a toddler who's screaming for you nonstop, and the fact that you just want to call her
a damn baby to your friends over a glass of wine doesn't necessarily make you a bad
person.
Ah, you're always going on about your damn baby.
Yeah, yeah, of course, I won't say anything else about the damn baby, DAMN BABY!
Ugh, damn baby.
Well, of course this wasn't the end of it.
EFF did decide to take me on, so they sent a letter to Tomi Watson explaining why all
of the stuff in her letter was wrong, and, um, I don't know, I kind of genuinely did
think that would be the end of it, like I didn't think, uh, I didn't think they'd respond.
But they did.
Um, so yeah, let's, uh, let's see what they said.
As your organization, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, EFF, is a close partner with the
Organization for Transformative Works, OTW, and was clearly working with Lindsay Ellis
on the video, the EFF is aware that for over two years, my client, Addison Cain, Ms. Cain,
has been involved in two lawsuits in which the plaintiff, Quill Inc. Books Ltd., was
supported by the OTW.
OT... the people who own AO3, the fanfiction website?
Regardless of what really happened during the two lawsuits, it is clear that you and
your clients were intent on spreading false allegations and outright lies about my clients
and the litigation in the monetized video, which the EFF received a portion of the proceeds
to help produce.
Ms. Ellis could have easily condensed use of Ms. Cain's book into a few paragraphs for
illustration instead of reading from the book for over two minutes.
How... how long do you think it takes to read a few paragraphs?
Like...
Zoe Ellis and her attorneys utilized numerous methods to obtain their objective to spear
Ms. Cain's name, but one common denominator has been their utilization of the OTW, of
which the EFF is a close partner.
It is our opinion that defamation exists, and because the EFF worked in collusion with
Lindsay Ellis to create the monetized video, the EFF is also culpable for the copyright
infringement and the defamation.
Lindsay Ellis goes on to further claim the EFF is the leading non-profit defending digital
privacy.
However, the relationship between the EFF and the OTW in this instance makes that statement
shaky at best.
The OTW previously partnered with Zoe Ellis and her agents, who went to great lengths
to expose my client's real name, home address, and photos of her child in relation to her
real name and home address, which is the opposite of digital privacy.
The tie between OTW and the EFF, and the history of abuse my client has faced the last
two years, makes the use of Lindsay Ellis, a YouTube-slash-Patreon personality with public
sway, suspicious in the least, particularly when you assisted in the creation of a monetized
video where both the EFF and Lindsay Ellis could profit off copyright infringement and
defamation.
As you are clearly aware, the fair use doctrine is highly subjective, and we find your analysis
of Ms. Ellis' use of Ms. Kane's book erroneous and incomplete.
As your client is unaware of legal procedure, she must also not understand that simply because
a motion-slash-complaint was filed in court does not mean the statement is true.
However, there is no excuse for your lack of due diligence on this topic.
Ms. Ellis clearly creates her videos and publishes them on YouTube and Patreon for profit, and
the EFF profited as well in this case, a factor that strongly cuts against your fair
use argument.
As a direct result of the video, see Exhibit 1 showing evidence of a Twitter user who states
that he gave a one-star review to my client's book.
God damn it, you fucking asshole.
Despite my client's current public silence regarding Lindsay Ellis, her ongoing accusations,
the defaming video, and verbal attacks of her child, your client has gone to great lengths
to continue to spread baseless accusations and misinformation.
Regardless of this failure, it is clear that the EFF, through Lindsay Ellis, is now attempting
to drag the battle's corpses over the finish line by making a defamatory video and misleading
the public about your agenda, using a legally ignorant layman to do your dirty work in exchange
for donations.
We request a public apology from both the EFF and Lindsay Ellis for knowingly spreading
false information for profit.
And finally, we request that Lindsay Ellis and the EFF donate all proceeds made from
the defaming video to the anti-bully charity, KindCampaign.com.
It's the champagne of beers.
Oh my god, I can't believe I even need to say this.
Neither EFF nor OTW had anything to do with the production of that video.
No collusion.
To date, I have not made a donation to EFF, especially since the damn video is demonetized.
I only chose EFF because they were a non-profit that was irrelevant to the topics of the court
case.
But Jesus Christ, the moon logic of bringing the OTW into this, like, I don't even have
an AO3 account.
I have no contact or affiliation with OTW.
I did reach out to them about this video and they left me on read.
The only connection I have with OTW is I wrote one article for them earlier this year when
my book came out that nobody read and I lost a Hugo to them last year.
For best related work.
You guys deserve to win the Hugo, it's fine.
But the moon logic of even connecting OTW to this case is that Ellis' lawyers hired
Christina Busey as their expert witness on the topic of fanfiction and she happens to
be on the board of OTW.
So this letter definitely does fall into a pattern with regard to people and lawyers,
which is, you know what, the actual client, they're just dupes.
They're ignorant laymen.
You know, we attack the lawyers who are the real masterminds.
In this case, the fact that the EFF has worked with OTW before on completely unrelated things
means that there is a fanfiction deep state keen on taking Addison Cain down.
Pepe Sylvia, Pepe Sylvia, I looked in the mail, well this whole box is Pepe Sylvia!
Well your claim that I am a legally ignorant layman kind of works against all that stuff
that you're so mad about because clearly I don't know what I'm talking about.
My opinions, as expressed in the video, were good faith interpretations of the facts that
I had as I understood them.
And I may not have a law degree, but I do have a little tool you may not have heard
of.
It's called Goomba.
And to claim defamation against a public figure like Addison Cain, you have to show actual
malice that you published with either knowledge of falsity or reckless disregard for the truth,
which I did not.
But a lot of the stuff that Addison and her lawyer Taylee are so mad about, well, I got
my interpretation of it actually from lawyers, but not lawyers that I know.
It's from a podcast called All Lawyers Are Bad.
He serves a series of requests for admission, including a key one, which is admit that Cain
misrepresented her involvement with the filing of the DMCA takedown notices against Zoe Ellis.
And the response was, admit it.
Cain was willing to lie her ass off, but the lawyers representing her confronted with
this request to admit did not, and they admitted that in fact she lied, and that she had been
entirely involved in the DMCA's issued into Oklahoma.
Turn down for what?
And they read out loud about as much copyrighted material as I did.
It was necessary, and it will only be beneficial to you if, in your coming estrous cycle, you
should conceal it.
And they were also a lot harsher, going so far as to call Cain things like,
To the profiteering shitheads.
They also use her real name a lot, which I never did.
So I wonder, why did they never get a DMCA takedown notice or emails from her lawyer?
Tell me.
Because if she's attractive, I'm gonna do everything I can to try to make her case.
I have to say, she's, I'm not gonna, I'm just gonna come out, she's hot.
Uh-huh.
I guess that'll do it.
Maybe I should have called her hot.
Well then again, I don't think that would have saved me.
It does not escape my notice that every single person that Cain has allegedly targeted is
a woman.
Poetic, that the charity she wants me to donate to is anti-girl-on-girl bullying.
But wait, you say, maybe she didn't even know about this podcast.
Oh no, mon frere, she did.
And something that one of the guys in the podcast said inspired her to commission fan
art of herself, drinking the blood of her enemies.
Yeah, you know, I'm just having a normal one, sitting on my throne of bones, drinking
the blood of my enemies.
Drinking the blood of her enemies, but she's the bullied one.
Hashtag stand up to bullying.
And then we get to this anti-bullying charity at the end, where it's like trying to gaslight
people into believing that they are the bullies, and that they are the ones with behavior that
needs to be atoned for.
I can't be a bully.
I simply am the person demanding that you be better.
All of those other people making accusations against me?
Well, they were not the bullied ones.
I was the bullied one.
They were the bullies.
Any action I took against them, I had to take it.
It's totally normal that there are so many of them and they all kinda have the same story.
And you ever notice how people who crow about victimhood the loudest tend to be bullies themselves?
Now that said, I did make a couple hundred dollars off of it before it got demonetized.
So as a gesture of good faith, I went ahead and donated the money that would have gone
to EFF to the Kind campaign.
Are we square?
And I don't want this to be the Addison Cain drama channel.
I genuinely hope this is the last video I make on the subject.
By which I mean I hope we don't go to court.
That said, it is petty fandom bullshit, but it does real harm.
In the great Regina George tradition, this does have impact on people's lives.
Every single author that I talk to, except Courtney Milan, said that their careers have
been harmed by everything Addison Cain has done, from DMCA on to petty fandom bullshit.
Now that said, to reiterate myself, don't harass her, goddammit.
She blames me for every single one of you idiots that are shitty to her on social media.
I understand the energy needing to go somewhere, where a quarantine and public shaming is fun.
But if you really want to piss her off, instead of being an asshole on Twitter, support the
authors that she has targeted.
I was really glib about the whole erotica thing in the first video, and I kind of would
like to backtrack that.
Erotica is a real legit genre, and if you're into it, go check them out.
Most of it's ABO.
Not for me.
But it might be for you.
Awoooooo.
Outside of that, there is Courtney Milan.
She just had a book come out that features an Asian hero, and that's something you'd
never see in the US in a traditional romance publishing, so go check her out.
And when I said I'm gonna milk the shit out of this, what of course I meant was merchandise.
And no, I don't actually mean this shirt.
You can't buy this.
Elisa, the comment matriarch, has been crafty lately, so she made this for me and a few
friends as a joke.
But there is some stuff you can buy.
And our good friends at DFTBA were super down with it.
We of course were very inspired by Lindsay Ellis' A Menace, so came up with a Saul Bass
inspired embossed pen you can get.
I'd also love to thank Tammy Watson for coming up with this idea of the fan fiction
deep state.
Just loves it.
Not a direct reference per se, but we were definitely inspired by the myth of the Karen,
let's say.
And finally, my personal favorite, the With Prejudice hat.
Buy it for the lawyer in your life.
They don't need to know the context.
And if you do know the context, it's very funny.
So enjoy our dumb merch, and join the hashtag fan fiction deep state.
One last thing before we go.
Patreon is a membership service, and my patrons are charged not by the content unit, but by
the month.
So if someone wanted to get into the weeds of monetization, they should understand that
people who give money to my Patreon are effectively paying for membership to me, which includes
certain perks, i.e. name in credits.
They are not paying for the content itself, they are in effect paying membership dues.
And ain't no ads on this video, so it is going unmonetized.
And while we're here, I'd like to thank the fine folks at Patreon for supporting creators,
standing up for fair use, and for being all around a bunch of really solid menches.
Thanks for watching.
Which is the opposite of digital privacy.
Wow.
