So if you follow me on Twitter, then you know that when I'm not being cranky, or angry, or sad at the state of the world,
or ceaselessly disappointed in James Woods, or cranky...
You know, I really did love Moana.
There's no need to pray, it's okay, you're welcome.
Moana was probably my favorite movie to come out of Disney Animation Studios since the 90s.
It was, you know, simple movie, buddy comedy, but, you know, tight, and well done, and I loved it.
And you know what else I love? Disney villains.
You know, that thing Moana didn't really have?
Well, Terminator hasn't always been this glam.
I mean, it kinda did, but not in that, like, classic Disney villain kinda way.
Thinking you could defeat me? Me! The mistress of all evil!
Disney villains are probably my favorite aspect to all of Disney animated canon.
And I'm not alone. Disney has noticed this.
I went to Disney World last year, and probably my favorite thing I did was this new thing called Club Villain,
and it was great, it was hosted by Dr. Facilier, and we got to chill and hang out with all these classic villains,
and they brought out their A-team, as far as the villains were concerned.
Only complaint is that it wasn't long enough.
Unfortunately, just gone and left most of my villain merchandise in a different state.
I have a bunch of pins, though.
Like, yes, I have fallen down the deep, deep well of Disney pin trading.
And yes, the vast majority of my pins are villain pins.
This one was Halloween 2016.
It's one of my favorites because it was an exclusive to Disney Visa card holders,
and I had just gotten one, and I was like, well, I have to.
It's an exclusive.
There's Maleficent.
Yzma.
Kronk.
Gaston.
This one is one of my absolute favorites.
Here is Radigan coveting an ice cream sundae.
I try to grab Hades whenever I can.
And Hades is actually the only Disney villain who is voiced by an actual heartless person.
This one's another one of my favorites because they're such ex-boyfriends.
More of the bitter ex-boyfriends.
Villains are a branded thing in the same way that princesses are a branded thing, and fuck yes.
Only thing is, they're making new princesses.
They aren't really making new villains.
I mean, considering the ones that we've gotten the last five years,
would we add to the ranks of, you know, the Evil Queen and Maleficent,
the likes of Hans or, you know, Assistant Mayor Bellweather,
or even Toma Toa, who I think is the closest we've seen to a classic Disney villain in a while,
but, you know, he's only in the movie for like five minutes.
The thing about Disney villains and movie villains in general,
as opposed to, say, real world villains, is that we like Disney villains.
That's kind of the point.
Disney villains are fun.
They're designed to hold your attention, to keep you engaged,
but they aren't designed to be repulsive.
Like, sure, they're bad, and maybe they want to own this lady,
but, hey, at least they gave her a choice in the matter.
Choose me or the fire.
Or maybe they kill the brother, but, you know, they're not that bad.
They wouldn't kill a kid.
They'd outsource that.
You know, they let the hyenas do it.
Kill him.
Or the crocodiles do it.
Or their, well-meaning, lunkhead assistant do it.
Or, okay, maybe they do kill a kid.
But it's only implied and offscreen, and, hey, it was war, China.
The little girl will be missing her doll.
Really, the worst we've seen from the Disney villain
is that time that Dr. Facilier squished Jim Cummings' fly.
Oh, movie.
You wanted this to be such a moment.
Disney villains are getting a bit of a makeover.
Here's an entire spinoff dedicated to the complex in our lives
of the children of Disney villains.
Shere Khan has this tragic backstory.
Maleficent is no longer a one-dimensional, spiteful mistress of all evil,
but a misunderstood justice fairy who's the victim of a rape allegory.
Ah!
And Beauty and the Beast isn't out yet,
but I think we can probably safely assume
that Gaston isn't going to get much of a makeover or a tragic backstory.
But even then, Gaston is more of a villain in the vein of Hans
than the likes of, say, Ursula or the Evil Queen or George C. Scott.
And despite being a total villain, Stan,
or hell, maybe even because of it, I actually like Maleficent.
Like, yes, it was hot garbage, but, you know, it was my hot garbage.
Point is, I'm not opposed to this trend.
You know, that's all it really is.
It's a trend.
You know, black and white villains are out,
and dimensionality and tragic backstories are in.
But what I've noticed is that
we don't really see the clear-coded, brandable villain anymore
so much as plot twists.
When it comes to nostalgia,
Disney will always have their catalog to fall back on,
just like it always trots out its older films.
But what about going forward?
Are Disney villains going extinct?
So classic Disney movies, with some exceptions like Pinocchio and Alice in Wonderland,
have a very simple story.
A young princess, some sort of villain who hates her for some reason,
and then we meet a prince, and love conquers all the end.
When Eisner and Katzenberg were hearing pitches from their animators in the mid-'80s,
part of the reason why they were more keen on The Little Mermaid
than Treasure Island in space...
besides the fact where it sounded kind of stupid.
Little Mermaid harkened back to the classic Disney staples
that were still huge draws to the theme parks.
A beautiful princess, good versus evil, love conquers all.
These were the elements that built the old Disney movies.
But when Michael Eisner and Jeffrey Katzenberg
took charge of the company and studio respectively,
they added one crucial element that has superseded the original
and persists to this day,
and that is the search for identity.
When will my reflection show
Who I am inside
There's so much more to me
To find where I belong
Give me one day out there
All I ask is one
This brought the basic conflict from external to internal.
Classic Disney protagonists, again with the exception of Pinocchio,
were pretty passive.
Things just kind of happened to them.
And they weren't searching for anything at the outset
other than maybe their one true love,
and also, I guess not being a slave would be nice.
Renaissance Disney protagonists, on the other hand,
might have been looking for their one true love, sure,
but usually the true love thing was incidental,
and what they really wanted was a coming-of-age sense of identity.
They wanted to figure out their place in the world.
So how do Disney villains tie in?
Did your granny say listen to your heart
Be who you are on the inside
I need three words to tear her argument apart
Your granny lied
Making a conflict about self-identity
rather than a simple battle of good versus evil
makes the story more complex.
A one-dimensional villain can exist in a more complex story.
Scar's manipulations work really well as a contrast
to Simba's insecurity in The Lion King,
but it can also hamper a story, too.
Take the inclusion of Governor Ratcliffe in Pocahontas.
Easily the worst thing in an already not-that-great movie.
Let me see how I do it
See, we get this history of fear, violence, bigotry, and genocide.
Eh, let's just pin it on this one guy
who was easily disposed of.
Eh, this problem's solved.
And Pocahontas never even meets the guy.
Just loading the last bit of cargo.
A strong narrative ties its elements in neatly.
The Lion King is a strong narrative with a flat villain
because the villain's motivation ties in directly
with the hero's internal conflict.
Same with Hunchback of Notre Dame,
only here the villain has a slightly more dimension.
Slightly.
Frollo felt a twinge of fear
for his immortal soul
What must I do?
Quasimodo spends his entire life being gaslit by Frollo
into believing that he cannot survive in the outside world.
Villain's villainy directly ties in to heroes' internal conflict
as well as their external conflict.
Now, compare this to Hercules.
Hades applies to Hercules' external conflict
but not at all to his internal conflict.
Hades doesn't care about Hercules except as an obstacle,
foretold by prophecy.
Hercules doesn't even know that Hades exists.
And Hades doesn't even meet Hercules until the end of the movie.
Like, they try to force this thing.
Now you know how it feels to be just like everybody else.
Isn't it just peachy?
But it doesn't make sense that Hades cares at all
about Hercules wanting to find his place in the world
because they don't know each other.
The villain is also one of the weakest elements
in The Princess and the Frog.
Dr. Facilier is motivated by greed
and has no connection to Tiana
except through her love interest, Prince Naveen.
So this mandatory villain formula
that worked so well during the early Renaissance
and it became basically mandatory
by the time Pocahontas rolled around
started to make the movies feel stale
when it felt like we were just watching the same movie
over and over again.
Because Disney villains are a brand unto themselves,
an element which can be decoupled from its property
and sold as its own entity.
So up until Tangled, sometimes villains were just jammed in
because that's what you do.
And once or twice we have a movie
where the villain is the best part of the movie
while also weakening the movie as a whole.
Hades is the best part of Hercules
but his evil plan is contrived and stupid.
Dr. Facilier is fun and he has a great villain song
but his motivation is weak
and his connection to the plot is tenuous.
Or Governor Ratcliffe. See, he's greedy.
And he is the only greedy.
But if you get rid of the greedy,
then everyone gets along.
Colonialism solved.
But in this newer era of Disney movies,
audiences respond to
more complex narratives
that are less about good versus evil
and more about
character development.
Look at The Great Mouse Detective,
which is a good little movie, but simple.
The central conflict of The Great Mouse Detective
is Basil versus Radigan.
Good guy, bad guy.
They know each other, they hate each other.
We don't really know why. We don't need to know.
The central conflict in Wreck-It Ralph is
Ralph versus society's expectation
for his prescribed role
which he wants to break out of
in society.
I mean, there's a character who's the embodiment of that,
but I don't remember his name either.
This new era of Disney started with the success of Tangled
and with Tangled we got the last real Disney villain
and not a well-loved one at that.
Like sometimes I'll get a Mother Gothel in my pins
like in one of the villain pin bags
and you better believe she's the first thing that gets traded.
Wreck-It Ralph breaks away from the renaissance Disney mold
even further by not only having an older protagonist
but by actively subverting
these villain tropes.
Examining villainous motivations and creating a scenario
wherein, with the right incentive, the villain
becomes the hero. Big Hero 6 follows
a more Marvel mold than a Disney mold
with the villain now allowed to have a tragic backstory
with a family and everything.
It is not automatically clear that this character will be the villain
when we meet him. But by that point
that was already a thing.
And the whole thing culminates with
Lord of All
Frozen.
Frozen takes a page from Enchanted
and also subverts a lot of old Disney tropes
a major plot point being Anna's
eagerness to get married.
In the earliest drafts, Elsa was the villain
but in one of the more brilliant branding moves
of all time, they decide
hey, let's make Elsa the heroine's sister
making a story about sisterhood
and reconnecting with family.
Hey, Thief Park Tyant, put your Disney World vacation
to the day. Reconnect with that family.
Yeah, I'll see you guys Labor Day weekend.
As always, thanks for watching.
Yeah, I'll see you guys Labor Day weekend.
And also we have a love interest that turns out to be the villain.
Hans is a bait and switch villain
that will also become a thing.
Similar to Gaston, yeah sort of, but look at how
Gaston is introduced. His first action
in the movie is killing an animal
and he is introduced with his sinister
dominating visage in shadow.
In Frozen, it isn't
until the end of Act 2 that
If only there was someone out there
who loved you.
Snap.
Zootopia does this too, and we see Disney
moving even further away from
the Disney villain formula as the story
in Conflict of Zootopia is almost entirely
between Judy and Nick. It's a buddy
cop movie where the villain really doesn't matter
and the villain ends up being like
an Alex Jones fever dream
false flag sheep.
Prey fears predator and you stay in power?
Yeah, pretty much.
We've reached something of a culmination to the
bait and switch villain with the resolution to Moana
wherein the evil
lava monster we have to defeat at the end
it turns out is basically under an evil enchantment
after Maui stole the MacGuffin
from her. And I honestly think this
resolution works really well without
being predictable. Let her come to me.
The resolution
to Moana is directly tied in
to Moana's quest to figure out who she
is. She spends the entire movie trying
to figure out why the ocean chose her for
this quest and the bait and switch bad guy
at the end directly ties into that.
Moana's compassion for the monster
makes her unique. So the two villains for
2016 were false flag sheep and
red herring lava monster. This also
ties in with a new but important marketing
move. The need for strong male and
female leads. And the result
is that these movies just don't
really have room for Disney villains.
But who knows what remains to be seen.
In 2018 we're going to see a Jack and the Beanstalk
adaptation called
Gigantic.
Disney we really need to have a sit down
about these titles because they're getting kind of silly.
So you can't have Jack and the Beanstalk without a
giant and that should lay
the groundwork for a traditional
Disney villain. Although I'm giving
this an 80-90% chance that it's
going to be some BFG
style. Like
the giant is misunderstood
and there's an entire
giant economy up there and then
there's a good giant and
it's going to be about overthrowing
the blood
of an Englishman based
economy or something.
Just saying, Disney's
been real big on the whole subversion thing
lately. Maybe a little
too big. You only
got so many trips to subvert,
you're going to have to get back to just
making stories that aren't, you know,
meta. If you start
singing, I'm going to throw up.
So now we're living in an age of
plots that are less predictable than
earlier Disney movies. So new Disney
movies are almost fighting
against the studio's past as
much as they are building on it. And
I kind of wonder how quickly
people are going to get tired
of this the same way they got tired of
the villain versus coming of age teenager
narrative as they did in the 90s.
I mean, look at how quickly
people got sick of M. Night Shyamalan
in the early 2000s doing more or less
the same thing. So
I guess Disney villains, you know,
they'll continue to be a
brandable, associated
property. They aren't
necessarily going extinct,
but they could be
an endangered species.
