Hello America. It's time to wake up. I'm afraid we don't have much time. The new bee order is coming.
For thousands of years we've been ruled by this
matriarchal insectoid monarchy. The ancient Egyptians knew about them,
then the Jews knew about them. Hey, hey, Israel is called.
The land of milk and honey, is it not? And you can't have honey without bees.
The Jewish hexagram itself is a honeycomb symbol. The hexagon in the center is an homage to the true
queen of Israel. The hexagon has always been the key to sacred geometry, you see. It's the
basic unit of honeycombs, it's the basic unit of organic chemistry, and it's the basic unit of
reality. The bee masons and the Illuminati today are drones of the queen bee. They both use bee
symbolism and they both know the power of the sacred hexagon. Now more than ever the bees are
in complete control, sickening that this goes on right before our eyes and people don't even
realize it. Barack, Biden, Bush, Blair, Brown, Bush 1, Bin Laden, they've all got bees in their names,
every single one. Could it be more obvious? But it may be too late. What can we do? The world
is full of good little worker bees mindlessly earning their honey, and they don't stop for
a minute to think about who's really in control. And now time is running out.
The Mayans knew something would happen in 2012, Nostradamus knew, Einstein himself said that
mankind would go extinct four years after the bees vanished, and in 2008 the bees started to disappear.
What's four years after 2008? It's 2012. It's so obvious, I don't know why I didn't see it before.
It's not surprising really, after all the bees have infested and destroyed our society. They've
taken over with their coalition of Judeo-Masonic feminist abortionists in their new bee order.
They've taken away our religions. Honey is the only religion we have left. We've been reduced
to insects with nothing left to believe in. Mindless workers, products of their system.
They've made us believe that we should sacrifice our individual rights endowed by our creator
for the good of the hive. They tell us we're the sons of apes, that just makes it that much easier
for them to take away our god-given liberties. The mainstream media will try to distract us with
lies and mindless entertainment while we all become their drones. Don't take their venom shots,
don't drink their venom water, and don't breathe their venom chemtrails.
This is all a giant sting operation, you hear me? A sting operation!
A sting operation!
