No, I hope everyone knows I'm joking, particularly the majority of my subscribers are from America, but...
Do you think I was going to go to a subscriber list and speak like half and he's like,
what happened?
Because we get programs like Oprah and Montel and stuff like that, where you've got a stupid audience.
I'm so sorry.
I apologize.
You've got bearded ladies and everyone's fat, everyone's stupid, and everyone's into bread.
That's the impression you get from watching these days.
I like bread! I like bread!
See, we get like fucking upstairs downstairs in Doctor Who and all creatures great and small and all this other shit.
I don't watch television.
Honestly, I don't.
I don't either. It's weird.
I've probably watched about an hour of television in the last six months.
I don't even think I've watched television in the last...
It just forced me.
Yeah, me too.
I watch certain shows, but I don't watch it on television except from a house.
Or, yeah, it's about a house.
But even that show is kind of...
How important was it? No, it wasn't porn that I watched.
I watched that on my computer.
I want to watch the show.
I'm a normal person.
Or you, Jizz. That's not bad.
I eat steel hamburgers and I watch bread.
I'm sorry. It's an inside joke.
I missed it as well. I'm sorry.
I have a friend named Steel Hamburger and he says,
I don't watch TV, but I watch the hell out of some bread,
and I said, I eat steel hamburgers in my TV dinner while I watch bread.
Yeah.
Is that a joke?
Yeah. It's a hilarious joke.
I don't get your young humor.
Can you tell me at which point I'm supposed to laugh?
I'm sorry.
It's not the kind of joke when you...
I didn't understand it. I'm sorry.
You herded my feelings.
So, Tool, where are you headed to?
You're saying you're seeing your sister.
Is that over the Christmas period or...
Yeah.
Like a passing visit or what?
Yeah, over the Christmas period.
Yeah?
Isn't she somewhere near Canada?
No. That's where I grew up near Canada.
Sorry?
I said I grew up near Canada.
She lives sort of near New York City.
Okay.
And what do the other two do for Christmas?
What are your plans?
I don't usually go to Christmas.
What are your plans?
I don't usually plan stuff.
Try to avoid hearing Christmas music as much as possible.
Sorry, Nick. I'm struggling to hear you.
You say you avoid Christmas.
I avoid Christmas music.
Yeah. We'll just not go into any stores.
Yeah. We can't go into stores.
We're going to have a hard time.
I don't know. Maybe you can get your groceries delivered to you.
I want to.
Some places have that.
That would be amazing.
Whole foods, I think, will do it so expensive.
Even when you buy groceries yourself, it's expensive.
But, yeah, they have a delivery service.
Yeah, I want my food delivered to me.
Yeah.
Why should I go get food when it can go get me?
Well, I've got two potential videos coming up over Christmas.
One is me cooking Christmas dinner.
Awesome.
And the other is, hopefully, hopefully...
Shit, the audio has just broken up again.
Hopefully, I'm going to meet up with Thunderfoot.
Who foot?
He'll be, he'll be, he'll be on his way back to America.
So, there's a lovely video.
I've got time for that.
If we can...
He lives only about 30 minutes away from me.
So, hopefully, we'll meet up.
Oh, does he have, like, a residence in the UK as well?
Well, he's born and brought up here, wasn't he?
And happens to, his family home happens to be about 30 minutes away from him.
Oh.
I never would have noticed with his accent.
He was from the UK.
Well, I'm not being funny, but I can't believe it.
It's like when people say that Thunderfoot and myself sound the same.
I think it's absolutely ridiculous.
Yeah.
It's like they're saying all Americans sound the same.
I find it as insulting as saying that you sound like Nephilim 3.
That's how ridiculous it is.
Well, we're not going to tell Thunderfoot that you said that.
Hey, at least you're not Welsh.
You can always thank yourself for that.
Or are you Welsh?
Maybe you are and I just insulted you.
People from Canada are all the same, though.
It's all right.
The Sarahan.
Yeah, well, that's good.
So we can start with the Welsh jokes now.
Bring on the Welsh jokes.
Bring it on.
How do you know about Welsh jokes?
You're American.
You're not supposed to know anything outside of America.
They mostly involve leaks, if I'm not mistaken.
You're English.
You're not supposed to know anything about bread.
And sheep fucking too.
Sheep fucking and leeks.
Are we going to get some more music videos?
Nicotine?
Yeah, that's...
We're going to get a few more...
Nicotine's going to rap.
That's not going to happen.
That would be awesome.
Sorry, I missed the answer.
Maybe play some Christmas carols or something.
Yeah, we'll see about that.
No jingle bell rock, though.
I'd rather shoot myself.
That's serious.
I thought that you were...
Scholastic, however you pronounce it.
I'm sorry, I'm dyslexic.
I thought that was absolutely beautiful.
Thank you.
Yeah, I'll probably do more of those.
Unfortunately, I don't have...
The keyboard that I have here is useless.
I wish I had a real piano.
I'd have him, I'd say, entertain us.
Play piano and entertain the crowd.
But no, I don't have any such keyboard.
We played...
Cathy did this beautiful singing.
Bonnet was a holy moe.
So what's Santa Claus going to bring everyone for Christmas?
Kittens, I think.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
I don't want Santa Claus in the house anymore after last Christmas.
He tried to judge my no-no spot, so...
I have a restraining order against him.
How much wine is that?
No-no spot.
Well, there were two wonderful answers there.
Sarah Hawn's getting her football, and Shelly Simmons is getting another cup size.
I'll probably just get some very small amount of money that will be spent on food, because I'm starving.
Sorry, you're not going to eat before Christmas?
No, I'm just...
Didn't you find a gentleman offered to take you out for dinner this evening?
We had some pizza before.
It was fucking amazing pizza.
Yeah, it was really good pizza.
And I pretty much ate most of it.
I don't think so.
We're like, oh, we're going to order a small and a large.
We're going to eat the small and take the large home.
And we wound up leaving with three pieces left.
Well, one for each of us.
Did nicotine eat any? Because he's a skinny fucker, isn't he?
Aw, he did eat.
But then he went and threw it up in the bathroom afterwards.
Aw, my stuff.
I know you because of the crazy lot you've said here.
Ah, thank you.
I'm sure in one of your blog programs you showed what a skinny fucker you were.
What are you, about six foot two, and about eight stone or something?
He probably weighs about as much as that.
You don't use that language in America-land, you know?
Like eight stone, like what?
Can you do some doctor?
Can I do what?
Sums.
Sums, I guess.
Multiplication.
Um, I went to public school, so let me roll it first.
Eight by fourteen.
Eight times fourteen?
Mm-hmm. It's quite easy.
Times it by ten, you get 240, and then take off 28.
240?
That's the way I would do it in my head.
Who uses stones?
That's how many pounds eight stone is.
Debate Crusher is trying to reach you.
In order to contact this user, you must close tabs.
Do we want to contact Debate Crusher?
Yeah, let's see what Debate Crusher has to say.
It's so funny he just appeared.
Eight times fifteen.
It's 120.
Did you say eight times fifteen?
Fourteen.
Fourteen?
Oh, Jesus Christ.
It's like fucking pulling teeth.
Fourteen pounds in a stone, right?
Eight stones.
Eight times fourteen.
It's 112.
There you go. Did you just do that on your...
I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I went to fucking public school, alright?
You went to public school to work out how to...
I don't understand what the question is.
No, you're from England, you don't understand what that means.
Like, when I say I went to public school, it means I was educated worth a shit.
It's still better than homeschooling, like...
Can we add fat to the call?
Yeah, let's add her to the call.
Would you add her, or should I...
Three way call.
It's my call, so I'll add her.
Okay, good.
Because I still...
