So I was eight years old when I developed my first serious amphetamine habit.
I guess it began when my grades started to slip.
Now if your parents are poor or uneducated or otherwise naive enough to believe that
grades are the reflection of some kind of merit, what usually happens in these situations
is they just let you fail.
But I was more lucky.
It's luckier, not more lucky you fucking idiot.
See, if you have middle class parents like I do, then bad grades are considered the symptom
of some kind of medical condition, at least when it happens to your fucking kid.
So they took me to a psychiatrist who diagnosed me with Attention Deficit Disorder and prescribed
Adderall, a drug whose effects turn out to be basically the same as high-grade crystal
meth.
Now I took this drug for no more than two weeks.
The problem was, once that shit wears off, you sink into a pit of fury and despair, which
I had no way of coping with at the time.
The thing about uppers is, you feel great when you're on them, but when you come down,
you come down hard.
And that is a heavy load to place on the back of an eight-year-old with no experience taking
mind-altering chemicals.
So by middle school, the adults in my life had forgotten about my ADD diagnosis.
But once I hit puberty, I began exhibiting some strange behaviors.
I would show an excessive amount of attention to my personal appearance.
I was known to style my hair for what was deemed an inappropriate amount of time, and
I would sometimes spend up to half an hour in the bathroom doing they-dare-not-speculate-what.
This evidence was laid out before the psychiatric authorities, who diagnosed me at age 15 with
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, for which I was prescribed Zoloft and a regimen of cognitive
behavioral therapy, which, needless to say, did not cure me of my effeminate neurosis.
Well pretty soon I started dating, and dating led to love, and love led to heartbreak, or
at least the teenage version of it.
And this called for new diagnoses, so I was diagnosed with first depression, and then
bipolar disorder.
And I'm not making this up, I've been diagnosed and treated for all these things by actual
psychiatrists.
It was the most intense when I was a teenager.
I was seeing a psychiatrist and a psychologist every week, so often that insanity became
part of my identity.
Because when you're 15, there's something kind of romantic about madness, especially
when it's 2005.
When I went off to college I discovered this, and this helped me kick the psychiatry habit,
at least for a while.
But it was only a matter of time before I was seeing another shrink, this time with
some kind of vague anxiety diagnosis, for which I was prescribed Seroquel and Lamictal.
Later on I ended up going to yet another psychiatrist to help me get off of those, which led to
a Klonopin habit that I kicked on my own a couple years ago.
So after nearly two decades of prescription pills, I'm happy to say that I've been off
all psychiatric drugs for a year and a half now, and I have to say, I feel just fine.
I feel just fucking fine.
I feel fine.
I feel just fine.
I feel just fucking fine.
I feel fine.
I feel just fucking fine.
I feel fine, Wendy.
I'm fine.
I'm just fine.
I feel completely fine.
Fine.
Fine.
The octopus boys are trying to siphon my headaches.
This is where mommy used to touch me.
Mommy took my blood.
The shine of milk is nasty.
Not all mommies are good mommies.
Honey, I'm home.
Isn't it great how I'm destigmatizing mental illness by portraying the mentally ill as
a bunch of octopus munching maniacs?
Brave is the word I want you to use when you describe it in the comments.
Well look, I used to be a mental patient.
It's different when we cackle maniacally at each other.
So when I look back at the majority of my life that I was seeing psychiatrists, what
I see are five different diagnoses, at least eight different drugs, many hours spent in
therapy, and thousands of dollars spent by my parents and by insurance companies, and
I have to ask myself, was this really necessary?
And I suppose I don't have the medical qualification to answer that question.
But as someone who spends a lot of time around me, I have to say that there's at least
a chance that in my case, all of this is just nonsense.
And I'm not saying that psychiatry is bullshit or that it doesn't help people.
I know people who will tell you that psychiatry has saved their lives, and for all I know
it may have saved my life.
I just don't know.
What I'm saying is that there's reason to be a little bit skeptical, especially
when you consider that most of the research on these drugs is funded by pharmaceutical
companies with billions of dollars at stake, and that many of the most prescribed psychiatric
drugs barely do better than placebo in a lot of studies.
I guess part of me worries that psychiatry medicalizes ordinary human emotions and treats
them as disease symptoms.
At the heart of that worry is a fundamental question about what is or isn't a medical
condition, and how do we even go about answering that question?
Well, one way would be to take a pragmatic approach.
A medical condition is a problem that we go to the doctor to fix.
So, for instance, the question to ask is, are drugs the best way to manage 8-year-old
boys who don't like sitting still for 8 consecutive hours, or is the problem that
schools place unrealistic demands on them?
Does a moody teenager have bipolar disorder, or is he just moody?
These are the kinds of distinctions that diagnostic criteria are supposed to make, but psychiatric
diagnosis is based almost entirely on the subjective self-reports of patients, or, in
the case of children and teenagers, on the reports of their parents.
Meaning that, if you know what words to say, you can kind of get the diagnosis you're
looking for, or that your parents are looking for.
Now you might think that we can improve this with more advanced neuroimaging or with genetic
testing, but even if that were possible, it wouldn't eliminate some fundamental doubts.
The decision to treat a pattern of thoughts and emotions as a disease can never be a fully
scientific one.
Even if my emotions are statistically abnormal, to call them diseased is inevitably to pass
a kind of value judgement on them, and value judgements lie beyond the scope of science.
I think there are clearly cases of depression and anxiety so debilitating that treating
them as diseases is the best approach, and I don't want to discredit the experience
of anyone who feels that their depression or anxiety is a disease.
However, when I look at the current state of psychiatry, what I see are a lot of drugs
on the market that make you fat, impotent, and possibly suicidal, only to alleviate your
depression to an extent barely greater than, say, inundating your colon with homeopathic
crystals and intoning a sincere prayer to Moloch.
And that, along with the fact that I couldn't afford to see a psychiatrist even if I wanted
to, is the reason that I now prefer not to see my sadness and anxiety as a disease.
Instead, I prefer to think of it as just this perpetual dusk that shrouds my life in a shadow
of harmless, mild despair.
So hail Moloch, hail darkness, let's whip out these crystals, huh?
You may literally be keeping me off the streets, and that is really what's best for everyone,
so thank you.
