You know, recently on the internet, I've seen a lot of people complaining about something
called cultural marxism.
From the sounds of things, it's a really big deal.
I have some trouble understanding what they mean, though.
When I look the phrase up on Wikipedia, it redirects to a subheading in an article about
the Frankfurt School and calls it a conspiracy theory about Marxists trying to destroy Western
culture.
But maybe we shouldn't trust Wikipedia.
I mean, it's an online encyclopedia that anyone can edit, and we can't trust anyone.
Some of them might be cultural Marxists trying to deny their conspiracy.
Let's take to YouTube.com to discover what's really going on.
Of course, there is always the slight possibility that the internet is full of crazy people,
and I recorded this video at the end of the rest of the stuff that I'm about to show
you, so I actually know, yeah, that is actually the case.
But regardless, maybe we can have some fun and learn something anyway.
So, grab yourself a mug of your favourite substance, unlock all the cells in your high-risk
mind prison, and have yourself a laugh riot.
Ha ha!
Ha ha!
Ha ha!
Ha ha!
Ha ha!
Ha ha!
Ha ha!
Okay, here's our first video, and that's a really unfortunate first frame.
I'd better hit play before I prejudge him.
What is a cultural Marxist?
Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha
That's something I do for a joke!
That's something I did!
I did that!
In a video!
Oh my god!
Is this a parody?
Oh, it's not.
He means it.
Oh, no, this is real.
Rocking Mr. E.
Marx is cited as one of the major founders of the social sciences, and as such, he's
a Marxist.
Wait, so feminism, gender studies, and post-modernism are all Marxist too?
Everything this guy doesn't like, agree with, or understand is all manufactured by
one guy.
How convenient!
There's still people out there that believe in Western values, and the entire aim of cultural
Marxism is to soften this up enough to transform the culture from the inside.
So it's essential that the opposition is either ridiculed or discredited.
So in other words, criticising things has made them change.
To the cultural Marxist, anyone who believes that human beings are different, or that these
differences are not always associated with social constructs, is a bigot, and so will
very quickly be vindictively labelled a racist, sexist, rapapologist, or any other term that
aligns with PC shaming language.
No, but political correctness upsets me, so please stop.
People are trying to shame me into not saying things that sound racist.
The difference between liberalism and Marxism is very clear given that cultural Marxists
are against free speech and anti-free market.
But wait a second, Rocking Mr. E has contradicted himself in the span of about 30 seconds, because
firstly he talks about how people will call you a bunch of names if you say something
they don't like, and then he says they're anti-free speech, but the problem is criticising
someone for something they've said isn't trying to take away their free speech.
That is free speech.
Criticism is free speech.
The instant anyone stops defending their argument and starts complaining about their right to
have it, something's gone horribly wrong.
I just want to point that out.
There's a bird chirping outside and it's going to ruin all the audio for this section, but
I'm going to leave it in anyway, because I just don't give a shit.
Stop it!
What's that?
You're criticising what I'm saying?
Well, you must be trying to take away my freedom of speech.
Yeah, that's what it is.
Ah, maybe I'm looking in the wrong place.
Let's check out what this guy who modestly calls himself the Golden One has to say.
I can't tell if half of these are parodies anymore.
Is this all an elaborate joke at my expense?
So for me, I never went with the mindset that I will get a fucking medal either way no matter
what I do, because for me, I just wanted to win, like, but a lot of other guys, the same
betas who are now complaining about this and that, they were the ones who like, oh, I did
my best, I got a medal, and when you go with that mindset, with that cultural Marxist mindset
that everyone is so fucking entitled, keep that word on your mind, true friends, entitled,
that you're entitled to get the exact fucking same thing as the winner, the guy who's trained
his fucking ass off and, you know, competed the hardest, struggled the hardest, went the
hardest, when you go with that mindset, and hey-ho, both guys are in their 20s, going
He trails off into talking about a completely different topic here, but I'm pretty sure
what he's talking about, at least in this part, is that cultural Marxists are the sort
of people who take part in the same competitions as quote-unquote normal people, and then at
the end demand the same prize as the people who win.
Wow, these cultural Marxists sound like total dicks.
That's not what Marxism is about.
Marx wrote about only asking for a smaller, lesser prize, made of silver or bronze, not
the same as the winner.
That's barbaric!
The Golden One looks like someone in control of himself, although granted, he doesn't
seem to know how to button a shirt and needs to hang a Swedish flag up to make sure he
remembers what country he's in, but otherwise he seems pretty compass-mentis.
Isn't winning its own reward?
Why is he so afraid of having his prizes devalued?
The Golden One protects his country by filming himself standing against scenic backgrounds,
lifting weights set to power metal, and ranting about homosexual propaganda.
So my official stance is like, the gay pride community, gay propaganda, no, Putin is absolutely
right, that has nothing to do with it.
I don't know, man, I think you should stay away from the carbs.
I don't know, man, I think you should stay away from the carbs.
Ha ha ha ha!
Okay, in my opinion, that's the funniest joke in this video, it's downhill from here.
Ugh, why can't gay people just be normal?
Why do they have to have pride in who they are?
Being proud of yourself is disgusting, which is why I am.
So are the cultural Marxists turning people gay with gay propaganda and gay pride?
Or are the gays an unrelated social parasite?
I don't think he approves of the gay, the whole gay community being hijacked by extreme
leftist betas who are trying to use that, use asexuality as a sledgehammer against the
family.
What?
But how did he know?
How, who told him?
Oh, I'll get you yet, the family!
Especially you, Kevin, you smug little bastard!
This guy is far too close to the truth, so I'm obviously going to have to move on to
another video.
How about this one?
Hey, folks.
This video is by my good friend Jimmy Skullman, or whatever his name is.
Uh, oh yeah, that's his name!
He's Davis Aruni, at least according to his fucking website!
Okay, this video is called Corruption and Cultural Marxists, but it starts off as a
rant about the inaccuracy of Star Trek.
But the trite morality plays that you find on Saturday morning cartoons in Star Trek,
just, they never run true.
For me.
It just, it's not been, I don't buy it.
My goodness, Star Trek's plot is unbelievable.
It's like some kind of fiction show.
You know, you can say a lot of things about Davis, but he's definitely gotten more honest
about the content of his videos over time.
For a guy who doesn't think Star Trek is relevant to anything or realistic, he sure
talks about it a lot and hasn't moved on in about three years.
But the feudal lords.
The feudal lords, just read any fantasy for this, there's always been...
Of course!
That's why he didn't want to say that Star Trek was just fiction, so it was obviously
fake.
Because he later cites fucking, fucking storybooks as proof of how the world should be!
I'm going to go back and watch the rest of that, I missed it.
Is that a firing range target full of BB gun holes?
But my god, Davis, your aim is terrible!
Rome back then, you had, you had responsible citizens that were slave owners, but they
treated their slaves fairly well for the most part.
Um, quite frankly, life was difficult back then, so, gotta roll the dice.
Allow me to begin my video about how I think society should be by defending slavery.
That's certainly the most interesting justification of slavery I've ever seen.
Though I have no idea what it has to do with cultural Marxism, considering Ancient Rome
was around thousands of years before Marx was born.
Three minutes in, and all the guys talked about is how slavery can be great, guys, and
Star Trek.
This guy has his priorities straight.
He talks briefly about how society was just fine in the 50s.
Productive people were in control.
Business owners, property holders, wealthy people that invested in their businesses were
in control.
And all the people without any control, the working schlubs, they were treated well.
They didn't have a government watchdog with its nose up their ass constantly.
Of course, the guy fucking forgot about that whole McCarthyism thing.
Now, society was fine, and no one's life or career was ruined by government meddling
back then.
No, things fell apart when the Welfare Queens came along.
You have those that do absolutely nothing all day.
In fact, probably, on aggregate, damage things at the end of each day and collect welfare
with the—
My goodness!
Not welfare!
Quite frankly, we live in a dystopian novel.
Just look around you.
Davis would know because he wrote a dystopian novel.
And by novel, I mean Fallout fanfiction with the serial numbers filed off.
No, seriously, he changed some names and sold this shit for money.
So, the guy who makes videos about non-contributive societal parasites,
major contribution to literature, is a book based on concepts he stole entirely from a
pre-existing setting.
Is Davis Arrheni a cultural Marxist or a different parasite?
He doesn't explain which.
These people, these rich kids, are looking for something to do so they all find a cause
to fight for.
A cause they largely manufacture themselves, but then start selling to people.
Nobody knows there's a problem until they invent this cure for a nonsensical problem.
Probably toss psychiatrists under there, too.
Also, psychiatrists are in on it, too, apparently.
Just add them to the list at this point.
Everyone you don't like or agree with is probably in on a conspiracy to destroy the world.
That's basically the tagline of the Dark Enlightenment.
Uh, Marxism, which is allegedly supposed to be protecting the lower classes, the proletariat,
you know, strength to the people.
That's exactly what Marx wrote.
That's exactly it.
He remembered it word for word.
I'm surprised because it's in one of his obscure novels, the one based on Skyrim.
Simply look at feminism.
Women are more miserable today than they were 50 years ago.
That's because you weren't around then, but carry on.
There's a study they've been doing for at least 50 years in the United States.
Every year, checking the general happiness of people, the longevity.
Name escapes me right now, but I'll link to it down below.
And yes, women have been getting progressively less happy thanks to feminism.
Davis apparently eventually remembered what he was talking about because he does link
to a paper in the comments.
Unfortunately, the paper doesn't actually exist.
It links to a dead page.
But if you Google search the article name, you do get to a paper,
so I'm not going to fault him for this.
Although I am.
It's his fault.
Of course, despite him using this study to hold feminism to task for the destruction
of women's happiness, the study doesn't even mention feminism at all.
Hit Ctrl-F and type the word of feminism in.
Like, that's how easy it is to verify the validity of his comments.
You don't even have to fucking read it.
50 years ago, they could choose whether or not they wanted to work or stay at home.
Now they all have to work.
Wait, so women have to work and have no choice anymore,
but are also choosing to be welfare queens?
Is Schrödinger's cat a welfare queen?
They're like those immigrants who come into our country, take all of our jobs,
but are also lazy and just claim benefits.
You know, in the words of the greatest philosopher of all time, Friedrich Nietzsche,
the best way to harm a cause is to defend it with faulty arguments.
When you defend your ideas really badly,
you make them look even stupider than they first appeared.
Aruni makes fun of himself better than I could.
He's beaten me at making him look bad.
I might as well move on to another video.
Um, how about this strapping young Daniel Radcliffe impersonator?
Fellow British youth, who is responsible for the ongoing attempt
to eradicate the British culture and the British—
British youth?
I love the British youth.
I used to be a British youth until time moved in,
coming over here giving me chronic skin problems.
Send it back!
I'm kidding. This isn't a real British youth.
He's a puppet for the BNPU for an offshoot of the literal British Nazi party.
These—I hesitate to say gentlemen—seem to know a lot about the problems plaguing Britain.
They have a huge and contradictory list.
The bastardization.
The genuine diversity.
The ever-growing debt owed by Britain.
Austerity measures.
Unsustainable housing projects.
Islam.
The uncontrolled mass immigration.
The dumbing down of our education system.
The giving away of our independence to the European Union.
The dumbing down of—
Islam.
By sending 12.8 billion abroad,
I'll start on how people sign Islam austerity.
Give us a spark of who's to blame,
and stop mass immigration.
Yeah!
And on top of that, there's a bunch of opportunistic, hate-mongering fascists
trying to garner sympathy with garbage propaganda videos.
Oh, I'll show them!
When I make my video about how women called Nancy are taking over the world
by not having sex with me when I ask them nicely,
and hanging out with Kevin,
I'll put the Game of Thrones theme over it!
That'll convince them!
But among their enemies are, you guessed it,
the cultural Marxists who invest our teaching establishment.
So Marxism is coming to get us,
along with capitalist consumerism,
which is kind of a weirdly contradictory thing if you think about it.
The capitalists that want to make us wage slaves,
as well as brainwashed consumers.
The heartless Zionists.
It's the center square!
We fucking did it!
Big money!
Yeah!
BNP video talking about the Jews!
I've shot my load now.
I don't need to talk about them anymore,
because they did it.
They brought the Jews up.
I'm done.
I'm stopping the video.
I don't need to watch anymore.
It's over.
Okay, it's probably mean to even compare
anyone else in this video to the BNP,
just because they target the same vague,
contradictory straw men.
The militant homosexuals who push for gay marriage and gay adoption
in order to destroy the traditional family unit.
We're trying to use that,
use a sexuality as a sledgehammer against the family.
The ongoing attempt to eradicate the British culture
and the British identity.
And the entire aim of cultural Marxism
is to soften this up enough
to transform the culture from the inside.
The heartless Zionists,
whose interests are foreign interests.
And let's not forget the Jews.
But it doesn't help that the phrase
was literally pioneered by the Nazis.
Oh yeah, did I not mention that?
Back in the 30s, it was Kulturbolshevismus,
or cultural Bolshevism.
It also functioned as an anti-Semitic slur,
because since Marx was ancestrally Jewish,
it was easy back then to denounce Marxist ideas
as part of a Jewish plot.
The phrase became popular again quite recently
after Anders Breivik used it in his manifesto.
You know that guy?
Incidentally, the cultural Marxism page on Metapedia,
Wikipedia for white supremacists,
used to point out the link between the modern phrase
and its original Nazi origins,
but even they are slightly uncomfortable
with being linked to the literal Nazis,
so the phrase has since been edited out of the article.
Now, I can predict what my critics are going to say already.
You didn't take these people seriously.
You just laughed openly at their ideas
and poked holes in their application of studies.
I tend to only apply reason to people
who are using it themselves.
When someone makes a claim like this,
that it was the Soviets that came out on top
by convincing the Allies to go to war against the Nazis,
you really have to wonder if they give a shit
about any historical truth at all,
considering that the English were at war with Germany
years before Stalin even joined the Allies,
and there's no evidence of the Soviets
convincing the Allies to go to war.
The Allies basically made their own mind up.
There was this guy called Churchill
who, you know, made a speech about, you know,
was his mind being controlled by Stalin?
Was Churchill a Manchurian candidate?
Or is it Manchurian?
I haven't actually seen that film.
Pop culture, yay!
Wait, but is pop culture part of a conspi-
Forget it, okay.
So when someone rants about cultural Marxism
as if it were real,
yet mandates themselves to rewrite history
to suit their ends
by baselessly claiming the Soviets
manipulated the Allies into war, for example,
it seems pretty clear that reason
hasn't factored into these people's thoughts
for a long time,
so why capitulate to the idea that they are
by taking them seriously?
Incidentally, someone pointed out
the baselessness of this claim
in the comments section.
Rocking Mr. E, a rational person, apparently,
surely responded by presenting their evidence
or changing their mind
in accordance with a lack of it.
No!
You're a revisionist liar!
You come across as a typical pinko
that perpetuates communist lies!
And just to solidify the bizarre link
between the cultural Marxist conspiracy theory
and anti-Semitism,
one of Rocking Mr. E's fans
responded to this comment chain
by declaring they think the Jews themselves
tricked the Allies into the war.
I think the Allies were tricked
by the international Jews.
Clearly, Hitler was the lesser of two evils.
But don't worry,
I'm sure they're literally the only
fucked-up person leaving a comment
on a video about cultural Marxism.
Just kidding!
There's so fucking many!
Let's go on a journey of discovery!
Away!
Leftists are despicable scum
and must be mercilessly destroyed.
Cultural Marxists abound in the northeastern U.S.
as well as California.
In the south where I live,
we actively fight it by drowning it in Christianity.
Smiley face.
Onward, Christian soldiers!
Marching as to war against cultural Marxism!
Nationalism is the answer to this cancer.
Well, at least it's catchy in rhyme.
Furthermore, it only ignores fundamental Marxist flaws
such as the fluoridation of water.
Marxism is the only ideology
that calls for genocide in the name of science.
Well, I can think of one.
Nazism.
That is a filthy, kosher lie!
No national socialist leader
ever called for genocide against anyone!
If you actually took the time to study
the political theories of the Führer!
So the Holocaust never happened?
Of course it didn't happen!
Even the Red Cross admits this!
Modern forensic science has proven
that these gas chambers are a hoax
that were built by the Soviet KGB,
which was 93% Jewish!
No Jews were murdered during the Holohoax!
It was all a ploy to steal the Palestinians' land
and create the terrorist state of Israel!
No, I'm a fascist.
I just like SS uniforms.
I didn't know what cultural Marxism was
until hashtag Gamergate happened.
So in conclusion,
cultural Marxism roughly means
help me, the world is scary,
and I don't understand.
Except when it means
the Holocaust never happened,
even though I wish it did.
So if you hear someone saying cultural Marxism,
I recommend you run away from them
and report them to your local
secret KGB informant that totally exists.
I'm just kidding,
there isn't a Marxist conspiracy to destroy the West.
No, really, there isn't!
I was going to jokingly imply
I was in on the conspiracy at the end of this video,
like have it slowly zoom in on me in black and white
and I start breathing really heavily
like, oh, he knows something, he's not telling us.
But half the people watching this video
probably really think there is an actual conspiracy.
So implying even for a joke that I'm in on it
puts me in a very bad position.
So I cannot make that joke, so I won't.
How's that for freedom of speech being repressed?
Ah, fucking subtlety is just wasted on white people.
Luckily, we're going to kill them all.
Um, ah, stop recording.
Great, great.
Yeah, fuck, that was the best take I did of that
and it's gone.
Fuck, fuck it up.
God, fuck!
What's that?
What's that?
I'd like to say a very special thanks to Hesti
if that's how you pronounce your name
and also if you want me mentioning your name
in a video where I basically draw the aggro
of a lot of very weird people.
Sorry for, you know, the association
but I have to say thank you very much.
You've allowed me to add to my budget
and do things such as throw popcorn all over myself
which I previously couldn't afford to do
and also shave and afford a nice moisturiser to shave with
because I swim every morning
and when you shave and you get chlorine in your face
it does very bad things to you.
Go, go, go, go, go.
I don't, I'm not going to push you off me
because that would be mean.
I'm not going to pick you up
because then the camera would know how I pick cats up
and I'd probably do it wrong.
I have never checked.
So I'm going to make you jump off
so I don't embarrass myself.
Which of course means if you decide to sit down again
that I can't stop you.
Great.
That's just great.
