The trope seems to originate in 1960
with Alfred Hitchcock's Psycho.
That's just my guess, though.
I haven't researched this.
Who do you think I am, Lindsay Ellis?
Well, it would appear that I have been summoned.
So since this topic is never gonna go away, apparently,
ContraPoints and I were, you know,
planning on doing, like, a collab of sorts.
But the thing is, like,
both of us are really bad at scheduling
and we couldn't, like, really figure anything out.
And then someone sniped, like, half my talking points.
I don't know.
I figure this topic is, like,
half of all we ever talk about,
so we may as well monetize it, you know?
So, do you wanna collab on the Psycho part?
Or do you, why don't I do the Psycho part?
I'm gonna do the Psycho part.
It's happening.
Whore.
So, you know what that means.
That's right.
This is a feud.
A YouTuber feud.
That's right, we're feuding.
Leave us a comment for who you think should win.
And, you know, this isn't, like, a regular feud.
This is, like, a cool feud.
This feud has merchandise.
No, really.
You can go to my store and buy one of these two pins
based on who you think should win the feud.
Whoever sells the most pins wins.
And 100% of the profits for these pins will go to
The aptly named Sir Not Appearing in this film.
Yeah, so the last time I named which charity
I was going to give merchandise profits to,
they got threatened with legal action.
And because the EFF worked in collusion with Lindsay Ellis
to create the monetized video,
the EFF is also culpable for the copyright infringement
and the defamation.
So yeah, it's unnamed charity benefiting trans youths.
You know, a variety of them.
A melange.
A rainbow, you might say.
This is why we can't have nice things.
So I did a Death of the Author addendum last year
after a bunch of people asked me questions
about the applicability of Death of the Author
to the works of one Joanne Rowling
in light of her new philosophy.
When you throw open the doors of bathrooms
and changing rooms to any man who believes
or feels he's a woman,
and as I've said, gender confirmation certificates
may not be granted without any need for surgery or hormones,
then you open the door to any and all men
who wish to come inside.
Which led to all sorts of fun feedback
from viewers of other fine YouTube channels,
such as reader of books, Vanessa LeBlanc.
The opinions you're going to hear today
are from someone who is not just, you know,
on Twitter, hearing what other people have to say
and hopping on a bandwagon.
This is because I read the book.
She totally read it.
At the very most, the concept of being a transvestite
makes a very quick, brief, fleeting appearance in the book,
and it's extremely unimportant.
It comes in the form of one line in the book,
one page in a 900-page book.
And master of cell phones, Gary of Swendon.
Society is built around the interactions
between men and women, and so it's not surprising
that they would have quite a formalized
and baked-in set of rules.
Five minutes later.
Why would we need to do anything in its purest, pure form?
What has Lindsay Ellis ever done in her entire life
that was of the purest, pure form?
The answer is nothing.
It's not gonna be exactly as it should be conceptually,
but you just have to deal with that.
I'm just gonna say, I haven't read this book.
I don't even know if it's out yet, actually.
Although my personal favorite came from one of Gary's fans
who emailed me to scold me because they thought
that death of the author meant I was literally advocating
for the murder of J.K. Rowling.
The thinkery.
So much of the chicanery stemmed from a misrepresentation
of J.K.'s argument, which is that she's just stating
biology, you guys.
She's not denying people's humanity.
I don't hate trans people, but what is wrong
with the trans activists that they think biology isn't real?
J.K.R. is being canceled for stating a fact?
Well, that's just canceled culture run amok.
But while a huge component against discrimination
against trans people is biological in nature,
namely the denial of healthcare and medical gatekeeping,
it is, in this context, completely besides the point.
No one is saying biology isn't real.
That's why the healthcare thing is such a big deal.
Because of the biology.
So for some people to reframe this discussion
like trans activists are denying biology
and that they are simply in their thinker, thinkery ways
arguing against this obvious falsehood,
well, that is how Sharon and Mike from Dayton, Ohio
will first understand the argument.
Joanne and Vanessa and Gary arguing against a point
that no one is making, but since that's the point
that Sharon and Mike are seeing argued against,
that is what Sharon and Mike think
that the trans activists actually believe.
So as with a lot of reactionary movements,
much of the anti-trans ideology
is rooted in an appeal to common sense.
And there really is something to this idea
of using common sense as a rhetorical device.
If a new or challenging idea is presented,
all you need to do is look at the camera
and be like, common sense, am I right?
And it's effective because by appealing to common sense,
the viewer slash reader doesn't need
to challenge preconceptions.
Like this cholera outbreak,
common sense says it's the miasma.
Germ theory, you can't even see those.
Which is why all of these debates are so frustrating
because to the Ben Shapiros
and the Joanne Rowlings of the world,
trans people existing doesn't have anything to do with them
or their lives, but there is something inherently
threatening about their acceptance by society.
So they have to make up scenarios
where it does have things to do with them.
And they try to sell these scenarios
with a very shallow brand of common sense.
What if penis in bathroom?
What if I'm dating one and I get tricked?
And of course, that old reactionary classic,
won't someone think of the children?
So won't someone think of the children
is a staple of every reactionary movement.
If society progresses one inch,
reactionaries are going to use the children as a shield.
The ancients among us might remember,
it wasn't that long ago that that was the argument
used against gay marriage.
How am I supposed to explain to my child?
Hang your shitty child for all I care.
McKaylee will just have to figure out
how to navigate a world where the gays
are allowed to kiss in public on her own.
Yes, if you steal my shit, I'm allowed to steal your shit.
That's how it works, whore.
So what people hear when they see these
very intellectually honest thinkers
decrying the cancellation of JK Rowling
is that all Joanne said was that biological sex is real.
And that trans people are being mean to her on the internet
because she was just stating a simple scientific fact, guys.
And all of this stems from an essay Joanne wrote
back in June called Turf Wars,
in which she explained why she was so deeply concerned
about the encroaching menace of trans rights.
Her essay was even awarded
the 2020 Russell Prize by the BBC.
So now we know you can win awards for essays
that have sections ranging from
wild misrepresentations of the truth to flat out lies.
And so for those of you who haven't read it,
which I'm guessing is most of you,
here is a quick rundown of the point she makes in her essay.
I was canceled for liking some tweets
and then standing up for this woman
whose place of employment declined to renew her contract
after her contract expired
because she was a dick to a trans coworker.
For people who don't know,
last December I tweeted my support for Maya Forstater,
a tax specialist who'd lost her job
for what were deemed transphobic tweets.
She took her case to an employment tribunal
asking the judge to rule on whether a philosophical belief
that sex is determined by biology is protected in law.
Judge Taylor ruled that it wasn't.
Here is incidentally what the judge actually said.
I conclude from the totality of the evidence
that Forstater is absolutist in her view of sex
and it is a core component of her belief
that she will refer to a person
by the sex she considers appropriate
even if it violates their dignity
and or creates an intimidating, hostile, degrading,
humiliating, or offensive environment.
The approach is not worthy of respect
in a democratic society.
The erosion of gender norms
negatively affects charities I run
because I might accidentally give money
to a trans domestic abuse survivor
or something about multiple sclerosis.
Think of the children.
I'm an advocate for free speech.
Too many girls who are being brainwashed by the gay agenda,
I mean, radical trans activists,
and they don't actually know what they want
and girls are transitioning
because of internalized misogyny.
Think of the children.
If I was a child today,
I might have fallen in with the wrong crowd
and gotten transed.
Like it's the Crips.
Snoop Dogg over here like.
♪ I keep a black flag hanging on my backside ♪
♪ But only on the left side, yeah that's the side. ♪
Long beach in the house.
Yes, I know Snoop is a problematic.
Leave me a comment about how Snoop is a...
Our once robust gatekeeping systems are being eroded
and now anyone can say I'm a woman
and be recognized as such in the eyes of the law
and I feel threatened by that.
The world is misogynist and porn is bad.
Trans occlusive language is misogynist, actually.
I was an abuse survivor,
so the idea of male-bodied persons
in the bathroom triggers me.
On Saturday morning,
I read that the Scottish government is proceeding
with its controversial gender recognition plans,
which will in effect mean that all a man needs
to become a woman is to say he's one.
To use a very contemporary word,
I was triggered.
I couldn't shut out those memories
and I was finding it hard to contain my anger
and disappointment about the way I believe my government
is playing fast and loose with women's and girls' safety.
This visceral fear reaction was in response
to the Scottish government making transition less gatekeepy.
Men in women's spaces is putting natal women
and girls in danger.
Gender criticals are nice, actually,
and they don't hate the transes.
And finally, think of the children.
Okay.
It would be so much easier to tweet the approved hashtags
because of course trans rights are human rights
and of course trans lives matter.
Scoop up the woke cookies
and bask in a virtue signaling afterglow.
There's joy, relief, and safety in conformity.
Come on, Snoop, work with us.
So I need to make it clear
that I do not care about Joanne Rowling.
I do not care about saving her soul.
I don't care about canceling her.
What I do care about is her influence,
which is why we have to discuss this at all.
But in the context of this video,
I am more interested in why these beliefs
are even in her head in the first place.
Like, where did her belief that trans women
are gonna do a bunch of bathroom assaults even come from?
Because it wasn't reality.
Was it then the movies?
Well, that's a complicated question,
but the answer is yes.
The mother half took over completely.
He was never all Norman,
but he was often only mother.
Why was he dressed like that?
He's a transvestite.
I did not know that the Bates Motel was in California.
Just like us, Snoop.
So before we jump into the roots of transphobic tropes,
we must first acknowledge
that the understanding of sex and gender
is always kind of in flux.
It is a theory that is always evolving.
That said, some very good faith actors
tend to get caught up
in this very hyper-literal interpretation of media,
i.e. a depiction cannot be transphobic
if the depiction in question
is not of a literal trans person.
Now, people are calling the book transphobic
because of this,
because it has a character who is a cis man
who dresses as a woman when killing his victim.
And no, honey, that's not how it works.
While the idea of cross-dressing men
may not be an accurate reflection of trans identity
as we conceive it today,
it certainly influenced the mainstream understanding
of what trans identity even is.
So a lot of the characters that we are going to talk about
are not trans as we'd consider them.
When a straight man puts on a dress
and gets his sexual kicks, he is a transvestite.
When a man is a woman trapped in a man's body
and has the little operation, he is a transsexual.
I know that.
And before we go any further, big old content warning,
because it is one thing to kind of, you know,
know about the tropes,
but to like see them in rapid fire succession,
you know, it's a lot.
Like, I don't even have any skin in the game
and it's still a lot.
So here's your warning.
In Western culture,
cross-dressing has often been used
as a shorthand for deception,
but not always maliciously so.
In fact, for most of history,
cross-dressing men are portrayed as neutral
or more often comical.
In the Iliad, Achilles tries to get out of war
by dressing as a woman,
but Odysseus figures him out
when he gives Achilles a gift of perfume
and Achilles doesn't lose his shit over the gift,
you know, like women do.
In Shakespeare's Twelfth Night,
protagonist Viola takes up service for Duke Orsinio
disguised as a young man named Cesario.
After some comic misunderstanding
and then lots of cross-dressing,
Viola's identity is revealed and it's fine,
compulsory heterosexuality all around.
The benign cross-dresser motif remained popular
well into the 20th century
with entries like Bosom Buddies, Tootsie,
Some Like It Hot, and White Chicks.
♪ And I need you, and I miss you ♪
Billy Wilder's classic comedy Some Like It Hot
in particular depicts a fun, harmless version
of the very scenario Joanne seems so worried about.
I feel naked, I feel like everybody's staring at me.
With those legs, are you crazy?
Now come on.
Men dressing up as women to gain access to women's spaces.
Now in this film, it's because the two men are in hiding.
Two musicians witness a mob hit,
so they dress up as women and join an all-female band
to disguise themselves.
Both of them fall for the band's lead vocalist,
Sugar Cane, played by Marilyn Monroe.
Well, see you around, girl.
Bye, sugar.
And compete for her affections
despite her thinking that they're women.
No butter, no pastry.
We're on a diet.
Oh yeah, well, sure.
But Some Like It Hot is not only considered
to be one of the greatest comedies of all time,
its freewheeling approach to gender and even sexuality
is widely considered to be the nail in the coffin
for the Hays Code,
as it was released without its approval
and was a huge success anyway.
The deception is revealed at the end
with no hard feelings and an ending that...
I'm good on level with you.
We can't get married at all.
Why not?
I'm a man.
Well, nobody's perfect.
Well, I wouldn't even call this a happy hetero ending.
I use the example of Some Like It Hot
to illustrate that even in the 1950s,
a time of heightened anxiety
over all things gender and sexuality,
Kinsey,
cross-dressing wasn't considered inherently deviant.
However, in all of the above examples,
the male protagonist's heterosexuality is not in question.
The joke is that we, the audience,
know the hero's true nature,
but the other characters do not.
But the more, shall we say,
influential representation of cross-dressing
to Joanne's concerns
also involves discovery about the truth
of a character's body.
Such revelation, however, is not comic, but horrific.
So, what changed?
♪♪♪♪♪
Ed Gein was born in Wisconsin in 1906,
the son of an abusive alcoholic father
and a domineering, hyper-religious mother
who only let her kids leave their remote property for school,
even going so far as to punish Ed
when he tried to make friends.
Ed's mother, Agatha,
was a hellfire and brimstone preacher
who preached to her sons
about the innate immorality of the world,
the evils of drinking,
and her belief that all women, apart from herself,
were naturally promiscuous
and the instruments of the devil.
When she died in 1945, Ed was devastated.
In the words of one of his biographers,
he had lost his only friend and one true love.
On the morning of November 16th, 1957,
Plainfield hardware store owner Bernice Worden disappeared.
Later that evening,
the Washara County Sheriff's Department
discovered Worden's decapitated body
in a shed on Ed Gein's property,
hung upside down by her legs
with a crossbar at her ankles
and ropes at her wrists,
dressed out like a deer.
Gein not only admitted to the murders of Worden
and at least one other woman,
he'd also spent the last decade digging up graves
and exhuming the corpses of women
who looked like his mother.
He took the bodies home
where he tanned their skins to make his paraphernalia.
This paraphernalia included,
but was not limited to,
a waist basket made of human skin,
chair seats made out of human skin,
a corset made from a female torso
skinned from the shoulders to the waist,
leggings made from human skin,
masks made from the skin of female heads,
a lampshade made from the skin of a human face.
You get the idea.
There are other more infamous killers, sure,
but none seem to be so inspiring.
The country was fascinated by Ed Gein,
particularly the type of menace he represented,
a sexual deviant, an Oedipal nightmare,
depicted in the press as a feminine
and gender confused man.
Here, the guise of femininity does not hide
or empower a clever heterosexual man,
but reveals a sexual deviant,
a man in gender distress.
Alfred Hitchcock's Psycho changed cinema in a lot of ways,
and deservedly so, in my opinion.
It's my favorite Hitchcock film.
Anthony Perkins and Janet Leigh are iconic in their roles
as Norman Bates and Marion Crane.
Techniques that may seem like old hat now
seem that way because Hitchcock was the originator.
We all go a little mad sometimes.
Haven't you?
The plot revolves around the murder of Marion Crane,
who stops at the Bates Motel
after stealing a bunch of money from her workplace.
While staying at the Bates Motel,
Marion realizes her mistake
and decides to go back to her workplace to make amends,
but before she can...
Ow! Ow! No! Ow!
...she's murdered by Norman's mother.
Of course, the twist at the end is that Norman's mother
is actually Norman Bates in drag.
The film does not reveal Norman's identity
as murderer and crossdresser until the end,
in a scene that admittedly did not age well.
Bat! Bat! Bat! Bat! Bat! Bat! Bat! Bat! Bat! Bat! Bat!
It would be accurate to say
that this isn't even really crossdressing.
It's a transvestite.
Uh, not exactly.
Like Ed Gein before him,
Norman is diagnosed with a schizotypal disorder.
He doesn't want to be a woman.
He just hears voices.
He quite literally believes he is his mother.
Why, she wouldn't even harm a fly.
But in terms of things that literally
actually happen on the screen,
Psycho is a film about a man dressing as a woman
while he predates on other women.
First, he leers at them in a way that makes it seem
First, he leers at them in the bathroom,
and then he kills them in the bathroom.
And he predates on women because they are women,
specifically because the mother personality
is threatened by Norman's attraction to them.
Mother, she's just a stranger.
She's hungry and it's raining out.
Mother, she's just a stranger.
But it's men who desire strangers.
And where is this most iconic of movie scenes set
where this woman is preyed upon,
but the place where she is most vulnerable?
The bathroom.
Thus, it is the figure of Ed Gein
and his fictional counterpart, Norman Bates,
who have captured the imagination of filmmakers
and novelists rather than other serial killers.
Because Psycho is inspired by real-life events, right?
This idea of the cross-dressing serial killer
wasn't made up out of whole cloth, right?
It was.
Life magazine, which ran an eight-page pictorial
sporting the headline,
House of Horror Stuns the Nation,
two weeks after Gein's arrest,
announced that Gein wished he were a woman
After an unidentified investigator
supplied the Milwaukee Journal with information on Gein,
the November 21st issue of the journal ran a story
claiming that Gein's unnatural attachment to his mother
caused an Oedipus complex
that resulted in Ed wishing he had been a woman
instead of a man
and wondering whether it would be possible
to change his sex.
He considered inquiring about an operation
to change into a woman
and even thought about trying the operation upon himself,
but did nothing about such plans.
But here's the thing.
None of it is true.
All of these are slipped to the press
before any real psychoanalysis of the Gein had been done
and none of the psychiatrists who actually analyzed him
concluded that he had any sort of tendencies
towards transvestism or even homosexuality.
Indeed, he seemed pretty honking straight
and resented women just like most serial killers do.
Thus, in part, Gein's infamy resided in an indication
that he was not fully masculine
in an era that was obsessed with proper forms of masculinity.
Ed Gein is remembered as effeminate,
a transvestite, or transsexual,
as well as the narrative trope that explained his psychosis.
And Ed Gein and the character of Norman Bates
are often cited as the first examples of this trope,
but that's actually not entirely true either.
The book Gender-Bending Detective Fiction
cites the 1950 detective novel
Vengeance is Mine by Frank Morris and Spillane,
which centers around a transgender killer
who the detective has felt some attraction to,
as an earlier example,
and that was published seven years
before Ed Gein even got caught.
So, Gein and Psycho may have been the codifiers,
but they weren't the first example
of the murderous crossdresser.
That idea was already there
because the anxiety over gender roles was already there.
Gen Z.
We just needed an excuse to make hay out of it.
So, thanks, Ed Gein.
According to Richard Tithicott,
author of Men and Monsters,
Jeffrey Dahmer, and the Construction of the Serial Killer,
we fail to read the serial killer accurately
because he is an embodiment of society's dominant values.
As a culture, we are so unable to admit or recognize
the connection between our dominant forms of masculinity
and violent misogynist crimes
that we must attribute some other kind of motive to them
besides masculinity.
Instead, motive is attributed to perceived gender deviance,
in particular, the men coveting
or assuming the mantle of femininity
through gender identification or homosexual object choice.
What is the first and principal thing he does?
What needs does he serve by killing?
Acceptance in sexual frustrations.
No, he covets.
The 70s and 80s saw an explosion of films
featuring all sorts of plays
on the murderous crossdresser trope,
with titles like
Deadly Blessing,
No Way to Treat a Lady,
Dr. Jekyll and Sister Hyde,
Deranged,
Homicidal,
Private Parts,
not that Private Parts,
Stripped to Kill,
Three on a Meat Hook,
Relentless,
Three.
And of course, the most infamous of these
is Brian De Palma's psycho ripoff, Dressed to Kill,
wherein the killer isn't incidentally a crossdresser,
like Norman Bates,
but a canon transsexual.
You see, there's some men and women, too,
think they're born in the wrong body.
They're called transsexuals.
And all they want to do is have their sex changed.
Most include elements of the Gein mythos,
stealing women's body parts after the deed is done,
gender confusion,
which brings us to,
of course,
the act you've all been waiting for.
Goodbye.
So, Silence of the Lambs,
like Psycho before it,
has the problem of
being one of the best movies ever made.
God damn it.
See, this is why good movies are dangerous.
This is...
All movies are bad.
Isn't that right, Snoop?
You regret Mac and Devin go to high school, don't you?
Silence of the Lambs is the story of Clarice Starling,
a student at the FBI Academy
who's on the verge of becoming an agent
when she's tasked with profiling
the cannibal serial killer Hannibal Lecter.
I ate his liver with some fava beans
and a nice Chianti.
Pfft.
Hannibal has no interest in being profiled,
but he takes a liking to Clarice in his sociopath way,
and he starts giving her clues
to help solve the real active serial killer case
going on in the world,
that of Buffalo Bill,
so named because he...
Likes to skin his humps.
...gender and power dynamics
are very much at the heart of the film,
which deliberately sort of flips the male gaze.
Her boss doesn't respect her,
her colleagues leer at her,
others in position of authority turn cold
when she politely refuses their advances.
You know, we get a lot of detectives here,
but I must say, I can't ever remember one as attractive.
Only Barney, one of the orderlies at the mental institution,
and Hannibal Lecter, a convicted serial killer,
treat Clarice with any respect.
In contrast to Lecter,
Bill is presented as a deviant and coded hideously queer,
a gay man who lisps and cavorts around his dungeon basement,
listening to Goodbye Horses
and carrying around a poodle named Precious.
Yes, you will, Precious. You'll forget the horse.
The first thing we learn about him
before we even know who he is
is that he had a gay cross-dressing lover
whom he's implied to have killed.
Lecter is a gentleman and a scholar,
Bill is low-class,
and has a Hedwig and the Angry Inch aesthetic.
Lecter appreciates femininity.
Bill wants to appropriate it.
Aaaaah!
Ha! Ha! Aaaaah!
The framing suggests that Bill is monstrous
not so much through his killing,
after all, Lecter is a killer too,
but because he's a man who sews,
wears makeup,
and desires a sex change operation,
even though he's...
Not a real transsexual.
But he thinks he is. He tries to be.
He's tried to be a lot of things, I expect.
So Thomas Harris seemed to understand
that he was putting something potentially harmful
into the world
about a group that was already stigmatized.
So the film adds this caveat
about how Buffalo Bill isn't a real tran,
while Clarice makes it clear to Lecter,
and by extension the viewer,
that trans people as a group
don't pose any inherent danger.
There's no correlation in the literature
between transsexualism and violence.
Transsexuals are very passive.
But these little disclaimers
aren't what linger in your mind
when you think of Buffalo Bill.
In fact, everyone I've asked about it
does not even remember this line is even there.
But you know what they do remember?
I'd fuck myself.
He's making himself a woman's suit, Mr. Crawford,
out of real women.
Aaaaah!
I'd fuck myself.
So Silence of the Lambs comes out,
and suddenly those lying duplicitous transes are everywhere.
During this era, if a character is transgender,
it's usually tied to some dark and horrible secret
in the narrative.
And the revelation about the truth of their body
typically is revealed simultaneously
with the revelation of another secret of some sort.
That the person is a liar,
a criminal, or even a killer.
In 1991's Soap Dish,
a scheming actress named Montana Moorhead
is trying to steal Sally Fields' job as a soap opera star
by sleeping her way to the top.
Only for it to be revealed
that Montana used to be Milton Moorhead.
She was...
Milton Moorhead of Syosset, Long Island.
Hello.
And she flees the set in shame
as the cast and crew look on in shock and horror.
Montana's transgender reveal
elucidates her deceitful nature.
If she lied about being trans,
then she's a liar at heart.
And also a slut.
This is my moment.
I have to seize it.
In 1992's The Crying Game,
an otherwise gritty drama
that was nominated for a bunch of Oscars,
a woman has an affair with a man
who killed her boyfriend,
but she doesn't know that.
And, you know, it's progressing pretty normally
when, blammo!
You did know, didn't you?
Straight to the toilet.
Although I don't super want to misrepresent this movie,
like, it is one of the more, like,
sensitive and nuanced takes
we would see for the next 20 years.
And I also, like, gotta give it credit
for its, like, weirdly sweet ending.
But it does seem to be the first example
of a trope that was going to be
really tiresome.
In Naked Gun, 33 and 1 3rd,
detective Frank Drebin has an on-and-off flirtation
with the villain's girlfriend,
played by Anna Nicole Smith,
which culminates with her undressing for him in silhouette,
revealing this.
And Frank reacts.
But perhaps the most notorious example from this era
comes from Ace Ventura Pet Detective,
wherein it is revealed that a female police detective
that Ace kisses earlier in the film
is the same person as one of Ace's dolphin-kidnapping suspects,
who happens to be a man, honey,
a crazy one that went to a mental institution and everything.
We're talking paranoid delusional psychosis.
I saw the guy's room.
It's cozy if you're Hannibal Lecter.
And when he figures this out, of course.
Oh, my God!
Einhorn is a man!
Then at the end, when Ace reveals her former identity
by forcibly exposing the bulge in her underwear
to practically her entire police department
at the end of the movie,
wait for it.
One of the major indicators of trans women's villainy
in these movies is that they do not disclose their trans status.
Their trans status is used as shorthand for their duplicitous ways.
The nauseating revelation that they're trans
is typically treated as more shocking and important
than any actual crime they've committed.
There's no meaningful difference made between finding out a woman is trans
and discovering that she's a criminal.
There's also a sort of phobia of intersex and non-binary people, too,
that was, I don't want to say all the rage as much,
but it was definitely a thing in the 90s.
Pat from SNL was a well-known example from this era,
the joke being that no one can ever figure out if Pat is a man or a woman.
I was in love with someone who was not what they appeared to be.
Well, and what was it that Chris appeared to be, exactly?
A decent human being.
And this was a character popular enough that they even got their own movie.
We got it in Spaceballs 2.
I'm the bearded lady, but are you one of the freaks?
And in a 1998 episode of South Park entitled
Cartman's mom is still a dirty slut.
Cartman's mom is revealed to be intersex.
You're a big fat ass, and your mom's a hermaphrodite!
I'm sorry I never told you, Eric.
But because she is a dirty slut, she also has slept with every man in South Park,
and when they find out about this...
She was a he?
No, no, not exactly, but she did have a penis.
One joke.
One joke.
Yeah, this was eventually retconned, but who cares?
And yes, of course, there's Mr. Garrison.
But I paid $5,000 to be a woman.
This would mean I'm not really a woman.
I'm just a guy with a mutilated penis.
Basically, yes.
If we talked about South Park, we'd be here all day.
I don't really care.
And in the 2000s, the bro comedy emerges.
Dude, where's my car?
In 2000's Dude, Where's My Car?
a stripper gives a couple of stoners money for safekeeping
and reveals her trans status when she demands it back, and...
No!
Oh, dude, you're a dude!
Guys, if the mere sight of a penis makes you want to hurl,
like, how do you live with yourselves? I don't get it.
The trans surprise is there in The 40-Year-Old Virgin and The Hangover 2.
Both have their reveal and the idea of deception and shame for attraction
and or sexual relation with a trans woman.
You know what? Hiring a transvestite prostitute isn't helping me, man.
What? Ain't nobody hiring no damn transvestite.
What? What are you talking about?
She was really nice, incidentally.
But at least they've stopped puking.
You in Bangkok, sweetie?
That's the reason they don't call it Bangkok.
Oh!
Also noteworthy that most of these characters are sex workers.
In Family Guy, it pops up a few times,
most notably in an episode called Quagmire's Dad,
where it is revealed that Quagmire's Dad transitioned at some point
after fathering Quagmire.
Brian sleeps with her, and when he finds out...
Are you done?
This scene goes on for a minute.
Trans panic puke walked so attack helicopter could fly.
Literally.
Also, like, Quagmire's Dad slept with a dog.
And the dog is the nauseated one in this scenario.
But it wasn't in just stuff for bros.
In a 2000 episode of Sex and the City called...
Cock-a-doodle-doo,
Samantha's not thrilled with the, uh...
There they were.
Samantha's friendly neighborhood pre-op transsexual hookers.
Oh, hey.
Sex workers and women of color.
Nice.
I am paying a fortune to live in a neighborhood
that's trendy by day and tr-y by night.
It's like...
It's like sometimes it starts to be okay, and then...
Aha!
Don't I know it?
Samantha always knew how to get her way with men.
Oh, goddammit, Curie.
They party at the end of the episode, so it's fine, I guess, but...
Oh, no.
This episode is just...
It's...
It's so cringe.
No, Sarah Jessica Parker, stop.
Stop.
Oh, what are you doing? No.
I don't know, there's something about the well-meaningness
that makes it even more cringe.
Don't worry.
They have a very lovely life.
GLAAD did a survey of the representation of trans people
on television from 2002 to 2012,
most of which cataloged procedurals like
NCIS and Law & Order and...
Because that was most of what was on TV.
But the survey found that transgender characters
were cast as killers or villains
in at least 21% of the cataloged episodes and storylines.
The most common profession transgender characters
were depicted as having was that of sex workers,
which a fifth of all characters were depicted as.
An anti-trans slurs, language, and dialogue
was present in at least 61% of the cataloged episodes and storylines.
But starting in the 2000s, the narrative also shifted,
and we started to see more positive representation
of trans people in films and TV shows like
The Danish Girl, Transparent, Orange is the New Black,
Transamerica, Boys Don't Cry, and Dallas Buyers Club.
Now there's this attempt in the mainstream
to empathize with the trans experience,
where before it was...
And a lot of people feel like these efforts fall short,
especially when a cis actor plays a trans character,
which is... most of them.
All of them, except Orange is the New Black.
But even though that does deserve some scrutiny,
the fact is that now you have a mainstream who is ready,
even eager, to empathize with trans characters.
And in a way, this is what's threatening to people like Joanne.
Before, these characters were killers, and liars,
and criminals, and sex perverts, or all of the above.
But now, they're people with humanity and depth?
Hmm.
Which brings us to...
Troubled Blood is the fifth book in J.K. Rowling's
Cormoran Strike detective novel series,
written under the pen name of Robert Galbraith.
In this installment, it's titular hero, Cormoran,
an army veteran turned private detective,
and his partner, Robin,
basically a younger, hot J.K. Rowling,
Her face in the wing mirror was pale,
her blue eyes bloodshot,
and the strawberry blonde hair currently hidden
under a black beanie hat needed a wash,
are trying to solve a 40-year-old cold case
of a missing doctor, Margaret Bambrough.
You see, Bambrough, who was a gorgeous,
strong-headed second-wave feminist,
left her office one evening after treating
a shady, masculine-looking woman
who was never seen again.
And everyone, including Bambrough's now-grown daughter,
assumes that Margot was an unconfirmed victim
of the Essex Butcher, a 70s serial killer
who liked to kidnap women,
chain them up in his basement,
and eventually rape and murder them.
And he dressed like a woman to do it.
He likes dressing up in women's clothing to get off,
and he uses makeup and wigs
to make himself less threatening
so he can gain access to women's spaces
to lure them into a false sense of security
for the easier murdering.
Well, it's Cormoran on the case.
Who killed the second-wave feminist doctor?
Was it the Essex Butcher?
Or could it have been the ex-boyfriend artist?
Or the medical clerk who is so very fat
and wears a lot of makeup?
She's really fat, and she wears too much makeup.
Like her sitting room, Irene Hickson presented
a first impression of over-embellished,
over-padded opulence.
Just as blonde as she'd been at 25,
she was now much heavier with an enormous bosom.
She'd outlined her hooded eyes in black,
penciled her sparse brows into a high, Piero-ish arc,
and painted her thin lips in scarlet.
Irene helped herself to another biscuit,
frowning slightly.
Janice passed around fresh cups of tea and coffee.
Irene helped herself to another chocolate biscuit,
looking as though she'd said something very clever
as she reached forwards to take another biscuit,
and a deafening fart ripped through the room.
Or could it be the nurse
who speaks like a Cockney cartoon chap?
What?
Aw, you know Dr. Brenner probably taught Carl a fence-off.
He was an only terror when he was a kid, Carl,
and he comes across as the kind of man who owns a garage.
Or the questionably gay, I'm sorry,
camp man who just loves karaoke?
And will Cormoran and the J.K. Rowling stand-in
finally, finally confess their very hetero love
for each other?
So, this is 900 pages of J.K.'s worst tendencies,
from phonetically writing out accents,
He started dropping in, telling me all his problems,
and he tells me how he's mad about this married woman,
falling for his mate's wife.
On and on and on about how odd her life is,
and there's me sitting there with a kid of my own.
What about my odd life?
She had an husband, didn't she?
To the cool girl not being like the other girls,
to a predilection for describing characters' appearances
and weight so thoroughly and repeatedly
that it honestly becomes kind of uncomfortable.
Robin was trying to eat healthily
in spite of her unsociable hours,
but the almonds had long since ceased to be appetizing,
and she craved nothing more than a bit of the pizza
she could see an overweight couple enjoying
in the restaurant window.
A hugely obese...
Okay, this is getting ridiculous.
A hugely obese old lady came into view
on the landing above them.
She was clad in shorts,
She was clad in shocking pink leggings
and a T-shirt bearing the slogan,
The more people I meet, the more I like my dog.
The only occupant, a small, obese, bespectacled man,
wore jeans and a black sweatshirt.
He had a triple chin,
and his belly kept him a foot and a half away
from the white formica-topped table at which he was sitting.
Seriously, Joanne, what fat person hurt you?
In terms of theory, it's easy to read
a lot of biological determinist second-wave feminism
into troubled blood's influence.
Second-wave feminists coined the idea
that gender is a social construct,
but sex is a biological prison
from which there is no escape.
Asterisk.
There's a whole lot of flim-flam about gender roles
and how Strike's on-again, off-again flame
slash assistant is not like the other women.
Lots of women do this, men do that.
So much rape, and men can't be trusted
to not hurt women and do the rape.
Except Strike, of course, he's fine.
Joanne has a lot of opinion about not just the transes,
but the state of womanhood in general.
Such as modern fourth-wave feminists
with their slut walks and selfies and too much makeup,
are frivolous little bitches who don't organize
and actually work for a change
like their second-wave counterparts, the good ones.
Women who are uggos are just reeling for blood.
Actually, no, you don't need to be a full-on uggo,
you need to be, like, a six to go into a murderous rage
because boys don't like you.
That don't help a woman. It's better to be pretty.
You'll have a better life if you're good-looking.
Men always went for Irene, not me.
Why wouldn't anyone marry me?
What haven't I got that I'm a woman, Ev?
No one suspects the six.
Ancients.
Repeated Janice Beattie as the police car
drew to a halt outside her front door
and she squared her shoulders ready to accept her fate.
Ev consequences.
You don't have to write the accent in, Joanne.
We get that you hate poor people.
Contraception is fine, but abortion is morally dubious.
Imagine aborting your husband's...
What the fuck?
When you asked me to read these,
I didn't think they would be this bad.
Imagine aborting your husband's child, she thought.
Could Margot really have done that
when she already had that child's sister at home?
Oh.
To quote Vox.com's review of the book,
it's the writing of someone who feels she has no choice
but to bring some home truth to you, the reader,
and damn the consequences.
Now, you might be thinking,
I heard from other YouTubers who totally,
100% read the e-book.
I read the book, I spent the last 12 hours
reading it as an e-book.
I mean the hard copy.
With overnight shipping, a long, obnoxiously thick novel.
I'm sorry, I mean the e-book.
Reading it as an e-book.
Shout out to D'Angelo for catching that.
That the serial killer in question
is a cis man specifically,
and not a trans woman.
It only ever really seems to paint him
as just a pervert who looks cross-dressing
but he's male.
What do any of these tropes about women in general
have to do with transphobia?
Well, the book has this very Victorian
men and women do some things differently
and ne'er the twain shall meet thread.
Much in the way that, well, the Victorians
describe the phenomena as living in
separate spheres.
And to me, J.K. Rowling making the killer
a self-identified man in the context
of her public comments feels less
like her trying to assure the reader
that he is not trans, and more like
an assertion that any man in a wig
and lipstick has the potential to invade
women's holy spaces and rape and kill them.
When you throw open the doors
of bathrooms and changing rooms
to any man who believes or feels he's a woman
and, as I've said, gender confirmation
certificates may now be granted without
any need for surgery or hormones
then you open the door to any and all
men who wish to come inside.
That is the simple truth.
The way she describes her worries
in her essay completely lines up
with her serial killer's modus operandi
in Troubled Blood. And no,
I don't think it's a coincidence that these came out
at the same time,
summer of last year.
And this actually lies in contrast to Silence of the Lambs
wherein Thomas Harris
is even more aware than the movie
of the harm a transgender serial killer
could do to the trans community.
There's even a whole subplot
in the book where Crawford goes to the
gender reassignment clinic.
To even mention Buffalo Bill in the same breath
with the problems we treat here is ignorant
and unfair and dangerous, Mr. Crawford.
It makes my hair stand on end.
It's taken years, we're not through yet
showing the public that transsexuals
aren't crazy, they aren't perverts,
they aren't queers,
whatever that is. Hold on,
the incidence of violence among transsexuals is a lot
lower than in the general population.
These are decent people with a real problem,
a famously intransigent problem.
They deserve help and we can give it.
And Crawford's like, ah, I know, but I know
that and that's why we need to know who you rejected
because we know Bill is not a true
tran, a true tran would never.
The whole idea is the man we want
is not your patient.
It would be someone you refused because you
recognized that he was not a transsexual.
So even the author of the most
popular example of the gender distressed
serial killer is conscious of the fact
that trans people exist, that their
perception as predatory has no statistical
data to back it, and the
existence of a trans serial killer
would really affect the entire
community. But in Treble Blood,
gender nonconformity isn't even
mentioned outside of Dennis Creed,
sex pervert, who wears women's
clothes to get off.
He soon progressed to stealing women's underwear
from neighbors' washing lines and even
from his grandmother, Aina.
These he enjoying wearing
in secret. What?
There's never any actual discussion about being
transgender either, almost as if to say
that there are no trans women, that
anyone not assigned female at birth who
appears feminine is using it
to deceive women in some way.
In effect, every trans woman
is a potential Buffalo Bill.
I'd fuck myself.
So Treble Blood is
effectually resurrecting a trope that is already
really dated, you know, in the way that
foppish gay hairstyling
besties are dated, but is still playing into
a trope that has very real-world consequences,
namely the idea that trans women are
inherently predatory. And I don't mean to
imply that trans people can't be
predatory or abusive.
Every group has perverts and weirdos.
But being a pervert and
or weirdo doesn't have anything to do with one's
transness any more than it would
someone's, I don't know, gayness
or depression or whatever.
But this is the association that runs
deep in the popular consciousness.
She was described in court as a predator
who was a danger to women
and to children. I can only surmise
that the case of Karen White is
one of the things that upset her so much.
Karen, once known as
Stephen Wood, appeared by a video link
from the men's prison at Armley in Leeds
wearing a wig, glasses, and a
floral blouse. Karen White is a
trans woman in the UK who is currently
in prison for various crimes,
a lot of them sex crimes, in a men's
prison as far as the most recent update.
According to this article in the Independent,
White used her transgender
persona to put herself in contact
with vulnerable women. Right off the
bat, the media inextricably links
her sex crimes with her transness.
Notably, the Independent article uses
the prosecutor's interpretation of events
and doesn't mention the defense's
interpretation at all, saying there was
evidence to suggest that her approach
to transitioning has been less than
committed, and in fact was designed
to allow White access to vulnerable
victims, dressed up in drag
to gain access to women's spaces
and lure them into a false sense of security.
Hmm. Man, at least
when Jack Lemmon did it, it was fun.
It's not my fault I
didn't invite them.
So this article isn't just a list of White's
crimes, which are allegedly very real,
but a pointed effort to paint
White not as a criminal who happens to be
trans, but spotlighting her
transness somehow as relevant to
her crimes. Let's take a look at
one of the favorite articles TERFs like to
cite as evidence for the inherent dangers
trans women present.
Transgender inmates have carried out
seven sex attacks...
Sex attack.
I want a man who wants to
make a sex attack on me.
Transgender inmates have carried out seven sex attacks
on women in jail, despite the risks
male-born trans convicts are still
allowed to move into women's prisons.
So conservative politician Richard Cain made
this statement, which then went viral,
and the Ministry of Justice has said,
since 2010, out of the 124
sexual assaults that occurred in the
female estate, a total of seven of those
were sexual assaults against females in
custody, perpetrated by
transgender individuals.
Snoop, I know you're not with
the Crips anymore, but please don't kill me for that
trans flag thing.
Basically, this article talks about transgender
INDIVIDUALS
assaulting women in women's prisons, which
let's assume that that's
true. This word
INDIVIDUALS is doing a lot
of heavy lifting, because it's assuming that
trans women are doing the predation,
but neglects the fact that most
trans INDIVIDUALS
in women's prisons are
assigned female at birth trans men.
According to the data, we do have
trans men outnumber trans women
in women's prisons in the UK almost
2 to 1. So assuming that
sex attack number is correct, it doesn't
say how many of these seven are
trans men, trans women,
non-binary, or whatever.
So while the implication here is that men
in drag are sneaking into women's
prisons to assault cis women,
they aren't telling us who is doing the
assaulting. So if by extreme
technicality the Daily Mail is
not representing a falsehood in this article,
and for the sake of argument,
let's just assume that they're not,
even though I have my doubts,
they are relying on the reader's
biases to connect the dots
that trans women are predatory and
are a danger to cis women. Also
all of the data this article draws on is a
mess. Found out the hard way that the UK
apparently does not keep nearly as good data
on sexual assault as prisons in the US
do, and just the way that
things are phrased in this report
is super confusing to read
and therefore really easy for
bad faith actors to misrepresent.
For instance, there are the people who take bits of data
and clearly willfully misrepresent
them, like saying
139 transgender inmates are currently
housed in women's prisons.
Which is just flat out wrong. It's a lie.
That was the total number of
transgender prisoners in 2018
in prisons for either sex.
But that comes with an even weirder caveat
because this 139 transgender
inmates number does not
include people who have legally transitioned
and have the gender recognition
certificate that Joanne
is so f***ing mad about.
So people who are transgender
and have fully legally transitioned
and ended up in prison
somehow, aren't even accounted for
in this 139 number.
So who are these
people? Eh?
How are they counting them? Eh?
So it's absurd for them to claim
that they can draw accurate conclusions about
the dangers of the predatory trans
because that data does not
exist. And on the claim that transgender
people are disproportionately imprisoned
for committing sex offenses, another
TERF favorite in the UK,
according to the UK non-profit
Bent Bars,
And like with so many things,
that statistic is completely made up.
But it sounds plausible,
doesn't it? Because that presumption
of trans women as predatory
is already there.
Inside your mind.
Like the fanci-
I'm sorry. So you have this combination of people
with specifically anti-trans agendas
spreading misinformation based on a misrepresentation
of data that is already insufficient,
melding with an extremely
common trope going all the way back to
Ed Gein that there's just something inherently
predatory about trans women.
So while Troubled Blood definitely
has an early 90's
dated-ness to it, as Natalie
put it, my enemy
eternal, whore, you'd think that a
seasoned writer like Joanne would at least put a
new twist on the crossdressing murderer
trope. But she doesn't.
It's just dressed to kill. Only
in this book, the crossdresser is a red herring.
Spoilers.
Spoilers.
We have no evidence that trans women
are any more danger to cis women
than other cis women, in prison or
otherwise. And non-prison-related
studies do bear this out.
But we do have mountains of evidence for who is
really in danger in prison.
This being, of course, trans women.
One statewide study in California
found that when transgender women were automatically
housed with men, they were 13
times more likely to be sexually assaulted
than male prisoners in the same facility.
And a report from the U.S. Bureau of
Justice Statistics said that from 2011
to 2012, 40% of
transgender prisoners reported being the victim of
a sexual assault within the previous 12 months,
10 times the percentage of non-transgender
inmates. Regarding the case
of Karen White, a U.K. prison spokesperson
said,
But surely
your trans prisoners fall under the
umbrella of all prisoners.
So, what about them?
The message is clear.
The priority of cis women's feelings
of being in danger, rather than the reality
of trans people being more at risk.
And where do these feelings come from but the cultural
boogeyman of the predatory tran?
So, there's already
been a lot of discussion by
people who are not me, and
who actually care about this
sort of thing, about the weird gender subtext
in the Harry Potter series.
Whether it's Cho Chang, or
Voldemort's mother, or
basically any woman in the Fantastic
Beasts series. But, you know,
it was easy to hand-wave away with claims of
like, you know, well, J.K., but she donated
to ex-feminist charity, or, you know,
they're children's stories, it's not that deep, bro.
But, it's clear
now that there's always been this sort of current
in her work of acceptable
womanhood. In terms of actual
personhood, no one should care anymore
about what J.K. Rowling thinks
than, like, you know, Sharon from Dayton, Ohio.
Who cares what she thinks?
The thing we should care about is her
influence, and that's why we even have to have this
stupid f***ing discussion
in the first place. The International Lesbian
Gay, Bisexual, Trans, and Intersex
Association's 2021 Review of LGBT
Human Rights in Europe specifically
said this of Rowling's influence in the UK.
Anti-trans rhetoric continued
to cause serious damage in the UK
again this year. A prime example is
repeated transphobic attacks by author J.K.
Rowling on Twitter and in her writing.
The report warns that in some parts of the
UK, hate crimes had been steadily
increasing, in part due to an increase
in reporting, but also influenced by
increasing hostility in UK-wide media
towards trans identities and communities.
Mainstream media has only just begun
to center trans characters, creative heads,
and actors. You have shows like Pose,
produced, written, and directed in part by Janet Mock,
a trans woman of color, and also starring
multiple trans actors. God may have
blessed you with Barbies, a backyard with a
pony in it, a boyfriend named Jake, and an unwanted
pregnancy that your father paid to terminate so
you could go to college and major in being a basic
bitch. Or Sensate, produced, written,
and directed by the Wachowski sisters and starring
Jamie Clayton. Hell, there's even Difficult People's
Lola, played by trans comedian and actress
Shakina Nafak. Third airplane
goes right into the Pentagon?
I don't think so, bitches. That was
a missile. And Tower 7 was brought down
by a bomb. Whose transness takes a backseat
to the fact that she's Billy Eichner's work
enemy and also a massive 9-11 truther.
May your love shine as bright as the
sun did on that fair September morn
when George W. Bush pulled off the greatest scam
in American history since the moon landing.
On the character, Nafak had this to say,
In the quest for transgender visibility, we've
only been introduced to sympathetic roles that rely
on victimization or stereotypes in order
to elicit empathy from our audiences.
You're gonna love Lola because she's strong and opinionated
and crass, not because she's getting
bashed, locked up, or wrestling with coming
out. You do seem happier than usual.
Granted, that bar is set about as low as the burning
temperature of jet fuel. So how can it
melt steel beams? Exactly.
So while there's still the Ready Player Two's or
cyberpunk 2077's of the world
that include trans characters with,
and I say this very generously, good
intentions of inclusion,
while still falling on the spectrum of reducing trans
people to sexual commodities, progress
is being made and even embraced, which
is why it's disappointing and almost
surprising that something so archaic
as troubled blood is even a thing.
In terms of theory and media crit,
I have done what I can do.
But in terms of YouTube drama,
well, only you can help with that.
So I'm not kidding, this is real,
all of the profits from our feud merch
will go to...
Sir not appearing in this film.
It will be a good one,
I promise. Blame Addison
Cain for me not being.
And remember, trans women are not
predatory, except for that whore
Natalie.
Leave me a message about how Hitchcock is
a problematic too, I haven't heard that one.
Okay, I guess that's it, I'm done.
I finally have a dozen of my donuts
Delicious donuts
They're downright dunky
And they are definitely
done by only me
Yes they are deep fried
dipped and dabbed by Mr. D
And when I deliver
my delicious donuts
I do
the donut dance
Don't you want to do
the dance too?
What a delicious
donut dance
If you like donuts
Delicious donuts
Don't dilly-dally, have a dozen
of my donuts
Delicious donuts
Hold on, I paused in the middle to record that clip
What does he say next?
I'm just gonna say, I haven't read this book, I don't even know if it's
I'm just gonna say, I haven't read this book, I don't even know if it's
