A lot of people have been telling me that my video on some of the lab origin myths about
SARS-CoV-2 was wrong and out of date and there were lots of milk comparisons.
As always, I'm happy to issue corrections if an error is brought to my attention.
So I made the same request to each of them.
If you think there are errors in the video, please quote what I said and explain why you
think it's wrong.
Only one person did find an error, which of course I immediately added to the corrections
section of the video description.
But all the other supposed errors were either just opinions and expressions of disapproval,
a belief that the published science is wrong, a few predictable insults, one person didn't
like the title, or I got no response at all.
The funniest response I got is one which I think I'll have framed.
Just because this clip didn't have any errors doesn't mean it's not fake news.
To those who haven't seen the video, I looked at various claims that were going viral at
the time, like the mysterious intern who supposedly had been infected in a Wuhan lab.
That one went all the way up to a White House press briefing.
An intern was infected who later infected her boyfriend and then went to the wet market
in Wuhan where it began to spread.
When I fact checked that, it turned out to be based on a YouTube video claiming to have
found the source of the coronavirus.
There was no evidence presented except that the intern had no photo on one of the lab's
website pages.
That video, which got over two million hits, was also the source of other widespread myths.
I showed how it had mixed up two different research institutes and was at the end of
a trail of misquotes and deliberate misrepresentations that started with a Chinese professor, Xiao
Butao.
My video also looked at spurious claims that the virus could have leaked because it was
being held in a freezer with an alleged broken seal.
I showed that a supposed secret leaked dossier was in fact just a compilation of information
that was freely available on the internet.
And I showed how researchers had discovered that SARS-CoV-2 has a unique and counterintuitive
backbone, which is consistent with a natural origin, not bioengineering.
But people seem to have mixed up the issue of a man-made virus with the possibility of
a natural virus escaping from the lab.
These are two different things, and here's what I said about the latter.
After all, it's possible someone might have come into contact with bat samples and not
noticed.
According to the Washington Post, officials from the US Embassy in Beijing visited the
Wuhan Institute of Virology a few years ago and were concerned about safety standards
there.
According to the Post, the Chinese researchers at WIV were receiving assistance from the
Galveston National Laboratory, but the Chinese requested additional help.
The cables argued that the United States should give the Wuhan lab further support, mainly
because its research on bat coronaviruses was important but also dangerous.
I haven't seen anything that changes any of that.
The myths are still busted, the paper I cited has gone on to be cited by over 3,000 other
research papers, and the possibility of a lab leak remains.
So what has happened that's caused this sudden flurry of interest?
Well, firstly, a report published in the Wall Street Journal cited anonymous sources in
the US State Department based on the assessment of an unidentified international partner that
three people had got sick at a lab in Wuhan in November 2019 and gone to hospital.
Some media outlets, including the Daily Mail of course, claimed for a fact that this was
Covid-19.
But the fact is we don't know, as the Wall Street Journal makes clear further down the
story.
Look, I know in this day and age we're all supposed to pick a side and have a definitive
opinion.
But I'm not saying the story isn't true, I'm not saying they didn't have Covid, I'm just
saying I have no idea, so like so much of this new information, I find it pointless
to speculate, let alone reach a conclusion based on that speculation.
The other thing that happened was that the US President has asked the intelligence services
to redouble their efforts into finding the origin of the virus after previous investigations
were inconclusive.
Again, all this shows is that a lab leak is possible, it tells us no more than that.
What else happened?
Well, there's been a WHO report into the origin of the virus, but that was compromised by
delays in allowing investigators into China and alleged obstruction by the Chinese authorities
in granting full access and complete transparency.
Does that mean there's a cover-up?
Is this typical Chinese government secrecy?
Or is it resentment of what they see as a foreign interference?
Again, I have no idea.
It doesn't mean a lab leak happened, or that it didn't happen, only that it's possible.
So let's get on to the science and the other hypothesis that the virus is man-made.
The problem, as I explained in my video, is that researchers have found that the virus
shows all the hallmarks of being natural.
Not just the spike protein, which is often manipulated in gain-of-function experiments
because it's the infectious part of the virus, but also the delivery system known as the
backbone.
So has there been anything new on that front?
Well, yes, there was a hypothesis put forward by Segreto and Dagen that the virus could
be man-made, because the furring cleavage site in the SARS-CoV-2 virus could not have
evolved naturally.
As for the backbone problem, they argue that the Wuhan lab researchers could have used
the backbone of an existing virus, RATG13, because that's genetically very close to SARS-CoV-2,
and deliberately evolved it in the lab.
The hypothesis has been laid out in two papers, but both lines of argument have been contradicted
by other research.
This paper shows that a similar furring cleavage site does occur in a natural virus, and another
paper shows the method by which this can happen.
On the second argument, a response paper to Segreto and Dagen pointed out that there's
about a 4% genetic difference between RATG13 and SARS-CoV-2.
That may not sound like much, but there's only a 1% difference between humans and chimpanzees.
Virologists have concluded that SARS-CoV-2 and RATG13 last had a common ancestor in about
1948.
The two viruses are so far apart genetically that changing one into the other would cost
a huge amount of money, time and effort if it could be done at all.
It would also have been completely unnecessary, since backbones are readily available off
the shelf.
I'll be looking at that in more detail in my next video on popular claims by the journalist
Nicholas Wade.
For those reasons, the Segreto and Dagen hypothesis hasn't been widely adopted or cited, in
contrast to the Nature Medicine Study that's been cited over 3,000 times and is consistent
with other research.
The other new development was an explosive new study by Sorensen et al, a journal article
set to make waves among the scientific community.
I was first alluded to it by a post on my forum.
More evidence mounts as we debunk the debunker.
The debunker's supposed to be me, by the way.
According to the poster, this explosive new study shows that the virus is man-made.
But it's never a good sign when the source of your information isn't the journal itself.
It's the Daily Mail.
The Daily Mail says the study was about to be published in the Quarterly Review of Biophysics
Discovery, QRB Discovery, which is a perfectly respectable peer-reviewed journal.
And for some reason, the Daily Mail posted an embargoed copy of the paper on its website.
Straight away that struck me as fishy, as I mentioned to someone else who asked me about
this paper.
Because I often get embargoed papers sent to me, it's very common in the media, and
the whole point of an embargo is that it gives a journalist time to read the paper
and write up the story.
But a news organisation isn't supposed to post the story until after the paper has been
published.
Here the Mail is not only posting a story prior to publication, it's posting a copy
of the paper itself.
I've never seen this happen, so it's quite bizarre.
That aside, what's the evidence shown in the alleged paper?
According to the Daily Mail, the authors found a fingerprint that shows the SARS-CoV-2 virus
couldn't be natural, because it has four positively charged amino acids in a row.
It's rare to find even three in a row in naturally occurring organisms, while four
in a row is extremely unlikely, the scientists said.
The laws of physics mean that you cannot have four positively charged amino acids in a row.
The only way you can get this is if you artificially manufacture it, Dalglish told Dailymail.com.
But this was very easy to check.
One of the posters on my forum said it didn't take him long to find several instances of
four positively charged amino acids in a row in naturally occurring viruses.
I checked his sources, and I found them too.
In two papers I did a simple search for four positively charged amino acids and came up
with several results.
So much for this supposed law of physics.
So why would a reputable peer-reviewed journal like the QRB Discovery be willing to publish
such obvious twaddle?
Answer?
You're ahead of me.
Of course it wasn't.
The Daily Mail's claim that this study was about to be published in that journal, or
any journal, was nonsense.
They simply took the author's word for it, without bothering to check with the journal's
editor.
Once it became clear a few weeks later that this imminent publication wasn't happening,
the Daily Mail removed the name of the journal from the story.
But the damage had already been done.
Hundreds of news sites, blogs and fora had reprinted the Daily Mail claim that this was
a legitimate study about to be published in the QRB Discovery, again without bothering
to check.
Neither did they check the spurious evidence that you can't get four positively charged
amino acids in a row, which is still up there on the Mail website.
You have to go a long way down the Daily Mail story, past the photos and the clickbait to
discover that virologists dismiss this unpublished claim as magical and explain that this amino
acid conjunction is often found in nature.
Unfortunately, that glimpse of reality is in a box relaying how Sorensen et al have
been thwarted in previous publication efforts, not because their essay is bunk, but by a
conspiracy of scientists to silence them.
Next, there was a claim that the lab leak theory had gained credibility because of a
study by Piplani et al.
I think what they mean is that the man-made virus theory had gained credibility since
the study wasn't about a lab leak, it was about how well adapted SARS-CoV-2 is to human
cells.
The authors found that SARS-CoV-2 binds very tightly to human ACE2, the entry point for
coronaviruses into the human body.
Their conclusion is that if the virus is well adapted to human ACE2 it couldn't have jumped
directly from bats to humans, so the authors looked at various candidates that might have
acted as intermediate species, and although some looked promising, they couldn't find
a perfect match.
Which means we're back to where we started, the intermediate species still hasn't been
found, we don't know where the virus came from, and that vacuum of knowledge is what's
been quickly filled with speculation.
So why is it very unlikely that this affinity for human ACE2 is the result of deliberate
manipulation in a lab?
And apart from the reasons already covered, researchers have found that the virus seems
to have evolved in the presence of a human immune system, in other words, naturally.
And the way it binds to ACE2, like so many other things in the SARS-CoV-2 virus, is a
bit messy and counter-intuitive, an intelligent designer wouldn't have designed it that way,
but evolution frequently does.
Finally, another thing that's new is that we've had the email from a senior researcher
at the Scripps Institute saying that one really small part of the genome looks potentially
engineered, but a team of researchers is going to look at it critically, and further analysis
needs to be done, and they should know more by the end of the weekend.
And it turned out that when they did look at it more critically, they discovered that
the virus bore all the hallmarks of being natural.
At least that's what the team, researchers from five different universities and scientific
institutes from three different countries, concluded in Nature Medicine.
So does this mean that the researcher's initial impression had to be correct, and that any
change must therefore be the result of corruption and dishonesty?
Or does it mean that initial impressions in science are often overturned as research continues
and more evidence is found?
I can't claim to know the answer to that one either, so feel free to speculate on your
own.
All I can tell you is that I've been reporting on scientific research for over three decades,
and I don't find such changes at all surprising.
In fact, I've reported this on my channel before, when a rather crude estimate of past
temperatures was improved as better data became available.
That update led to howls of protest because the latest information didn't fit what a lot
of people wanted to believe.
The bottom line is that there are a lot of questions that we still don't have answers
to, and I wish I could make something up for you, like so many others are doing.
In fact, a lot of the theories that are coming out of this speculation are simply throwing
up more questions that don't have answers.
All I can do is check some of the claims that are bouncing around the internet and weed
out the ones that are bullcrap.
I hope that helps.
Asking lots of questions and then speculating and offering opinion is fine.
If you enjoy that kind of thing, but I'd rather not join the pack.
Of course, we do need to know where the virus came from.
But a definitive answer will only come from solid evidence, not misquotes, changed documents,
fake dossiers, exaggerations, fabrications, misrepresentations and magical facts dreamed
up in published papers that don't exist.
It won't come from circumstantial evidence, suspicions, guesswork or possibilities either,
unless and until the questions thrown up by this speculation are themselves answered.
But of course, that's not going to stop people pointlessly speculating.
These pundits always love to put quotes alongside their speculation to give it some kind of
intellectual legitimacy.
So I'm going to leave you with the wise words of that much overlooked philosopher and 20th
century intellectual giant, Ryan O'Neill, who said this.
Anything is possible, but possible don't make it true.
Thank you.

