I'm making this video because, as a former geologist turned science journalist, when
I've tried to explain the Earth's history during discussions on my channel, people seem
to be very confused about time scales and how all this happened.
So in this video I'm going to show some basic geological principles and how they relate
to the Earth's journey through the last billion years.
I'll answer questions like why is there so much oil in the Middle East?
How did geology help in the hunt for Osama bin Laden?
How does the Ice Age fit into the Earth's history?
What causes changes in climate and are there any cycles and patterns in all this?
Let's first travel back through time to our starting point about a billion years ago.
The Earth is a lot older than that and we can find rocks going back over three billion
years, but a billion years ago is when things start getting interesting.
We'll call this dawn, five o'clock in the morning, and end our journey at one o'clock
in the afternoon, the present time.
Then we'll go forward in time and see what will happen to the Earth 250 million years
into the future.
So each minute will represent about two million years.
By the time we get to our starting point, the Earth's protocontinents have already been
moving around for hundreds of millions of years, and a billion years ago most of them
were joined into one supercontinent called Rodinia.
The Earth's crust may be solid, but on a large scale it's very flexible.
It's made of a number of plates, driven around by currents of molten rock in the upper mantle.
Where thinner and denser oceanic plates made of basalt were driven against thicker and
lighter continental plates made of granite, the denser plate got subducted.
When that happened, the edge of the continent buckled and molten rock from the descending
crust rose to form volcanic mountain chains.
When the subducting oceanic crust ran out, the continents themselves would collide and
fuse, throwing up mountain chains.
Basalt and granite fit within one of three rock classifications, igneous rocks, in other
words molten rock that's cooled and solidified.
Where it cools slowly, the crystals have time to gravitate together, forming large-grained
rocks like granite.
Where the rock is cooled quickly, the crystals don't have time to grow so they're quite small,
forming fine-grained rocks like basalt.
A good rule of thumb is that the larger the grain size, the deeper underground and igneous
rock has formed.
Rodonia lasted for over 300 million years.
There was no life on land, just clusters of single-celled organisms building structures
called stromatolites in shallow seas near the shoreline.
About 750 million years ago, Rodonia began breaking apart.
The sea that opened up between North America and Australia became a dumping ground for
sediments that would later get uplifted by another tectonic collision forming most of
western Canada and the northwestern United States.
This brings us to our first geological principle – uplift and erosion.
Land masses get lifted up through crustal movements, then eroded through processes like
chemical weathering.
This reacts carbon dioxide in the air with silicates in the rocks and the eroded material
is washed out to sea to form calcium carbonates, the main ingredient of limestone.
It's an important process for the climate because over time it sucks carbon dioxide
out of the air.
Some of this limestone gets dragged down through subduction and melts, pumping CO2 back into
the air through volcanoes.
Fortunately for us, a lot of this carbon dioxide remains locked up in limestones today.
There's also mechanical weathering which takes out large chunks of rock through processes
like freeze and thaw or wind erosion and then grinds down the rock as it travels down rivers.
The result is mud, silt, sand or pebbles according to grain size.
These soft sediments build up around the continents, giving us our second principle of geology
that older sediments tend to lie underneath younger ones.
Hot water that ran through the sediments dissolved silica or calcium carbonate and then deposited
it between grains, binding the grains together.
Over millions of years this compression and cementation turned the sediments into solid
rock like shales, siltstone, sandstone and limestone.
These are known as sedimentary rocks.
Look carefully and you can often detect the environment in which they formed.
For example, cross-bedded sandstones show how ancient currents shifted.
Bands of mud inside a sandstone may indicate the ebb and flow of a tidal estuary.
Conglomerates formed from pebbles cemented together may indicate an ancient beach or
a riverbed.
They look almost identical to pebbly beaches and riverbeds we see today.
And this brings us to our third geological principle, the present is the key to the past.
If the features we see in the rocks are identical to the features we see today, it's strong
evidence that they were formed by the same processes.
For example, when molten lava is cooled quickly, it forms round lumps called pillow lavas,
identical to structures found in ancient basils.
This principle was brought home to me about 40 years ago when I was working for a diamond
exploration company in northwest Australia.
Yes, this really is me.
Our helicopter was coming down onto an area of rippling sand and I expected a cloud of
dust to come up as we landed, but there was none.
When I stepped onto the sand, it was rock hard.
It turned out that the ripples had been formed when this sand was part of a shallow pre-Cambrian
bay over a billion years ago.
If layers of igneous and sedimentary rock were buried very deeply, the pressure and
heat was so great that they changed into the third type of rock, metamorphic.
Over time, limestone became marble, shale became slate, sandstone became quartzite,
mudstone became schist.
The more pressure and heat that was applied, the greater the metamorphosis.
The heat comes from reservoirs of molten rock rising from the upper mantle, rich in minerals.
This intruded into weak points, often powerful enough to deform the sedimentary layers above.
When the magma cooled and cracked, hot water surged through it, depositing minerals like
silica and metals like gold.
Metamorphic and igneous rocks are still being formed today, but several kilometres under
the surface of the earth.
The only way we can see rocks like these is if they have been uplifted and then the strata
on top of them eroded away.
Uplift and erosion, which takes hundreds of millions of years.
So metamorphic and mineral-rich igneous rocks are predominantly found in the remnants of
the Precambrian, in ancient areas known as cratonic blocks or shields.
They're not only the oldest and most stable parts of the crust, they're also the richest
in minerals.
For a long time there was a paradox in this Precambrian world.
Just like a real dawn, the sun was much weaker back then, so weak that the earth should have
frozen over, and yet it didn't.
Geologists have concluded that what kept the earth warm was a high concentration of methane
and carbon dioxide, strong greenhouse gases.
As the concentration of these fell, exacerbated by other factors such as continental configuration,
temperatures began to drop and the earth went into an ice age.
Not this ice age, the one with mammoths and sabre-toothed tigers that began a mere two
million years ago, we're talking about the mother of all ice ages that occurred over
700 million years ago, when almost the entire surface of the earth froze over.
And because ice has a high albedo, in other words it's very reflective, what little
sunlight there was got reflected back into space.
So the earth might have stayed frozen if it wasn't for one thing.
Over a hundred million years, volcanoes under the ice continued pouring trillions of tonnes
of carbon dioxide back into the atmosphere.
This time there was no weathering process to wash it out, so the carbon dioxide kept
accumulating until it reached levels 20 times higher than today.
It acted like a blanket and trapped what little heat was coming in.
That started to melt the ice, reducing the albedo and warmed the earth even further.
Eventually the earth thawed out, and because CO2 levels were still very high, temperatures
continued climbing until the earth became a hot house with average global temperature
of around 70°F, about 13°C higher than today.
Coral reefs grew near the North Pole.
As we'll see throughout the earth's history, this link between carbon dioxide and global
temperature is so crucial that carbon dioxide has been called the earth's thermostat.
We're now in a period called the Cambrian.
Most of the continents were once again bunched together into a supercontinent, this one's
called Gondwanaland, although by the start of the Cambrian pieces of it had already begun
to break away.
An ancient ocean called the Iapetus was subducting under one of these pieces, the continent of
Laurentia.
Trillions of tonnes of sediment washed into the depression between the two crustal plates.
The land was still devoid of life, but in the oceans life now flourished.
Cambrian fossils show a huge divergence of body types, possibly because of rapid evolution,
the so-called Cambrian explosion, or possibly because animals had evolved hard body parts,
which fossilised more easily.
During the next geological period, the Ordovician, the Iapetus Ocean closed.
Laurentia collided with a smaller continent called Avalonia, and then the mini-continent
of Baltica.
The series of collisions threw up a huge mountain chain as big and impressive as the Alps today.
The granite bulk of the continents and the thick band of ocean sediments in between them
were thrust upwards.
Scotland, which had been part of Laurentia, was fused to England.
Yes, to all Scots out there, I feel your pain.
Connecticut was fused to New York, and a new continent called Euramerica was created.
But as we'll see, it was pulled apart again hundreds of millions of years later.
The remnants of this crustal collision can still be found in the eastern part of the
North American continent and parts of northwest Europe.
The rise of the mountain chain increased weathering, because high altitude rocks are more exposed
and weather faster.
And because CO2 is used in the weathering process, this reduced the concentration of
CO2 in the atmosphere, lowered the temperature and triggered another ice age.
Unlike Snowball Earth, this ice age lasted only a few million years.
It was centred on what's now the Sahara Desert and covered much of Gondwanaland.
The new continent of Euramerica was further north.
As water got locked up in ice, and because water shrinks in volume as it cools, sea levels
fell.
Geologists think the retreating coastline had a major impact on marine life and may
have contributed to the Earth's first mass extinction at the end of the Ordovician.
As CO2 levels climbed again, they pushed temperatures back up.
During the Silurian period, the Earth was once again a hothouse and sea levels rose.
The oceans covered Ordovician rocks that had been exposed and eroded over millions of years.
Ordinarily one layer of sediment gets laid down on top of an older one in sequence, but
when the sea retreats or the land gets uplifted out of the water, that process stops.
Seats may be exposed and eroded, even faltered and folded, over millions of years, so when
the sea covers them again and lays down new sediment, you get what's called an unconformity.
Which leads me to Bin Laden.
In 2001 I was watching the news and a video from Osama Bin Laden was played in which he
stood in front of a distinctive rock formation.
I'm not a sedimentologist, but the fuzzy image looked like a shale or a limestone sitting
on top of an unconformity.
Surely I thought the intelligence services can figure out where that is.
And sure enough, a few weeks later a geologist who'd done some exploration work in Afghanistan
said he knew exactly where that was and passed the information on to the CIA.
From then on Bin Laden delivered his Death to America speeches in front of a plain cloth
background.
But getting back to the Silurian, the Silurian is also notable as a period when land plants
evolved and spread across the continents.
A few hundred million years later, during the Devonian, sea-based insects and animals
also started venturing onto the land and fish became the dominant species of the oceans.
The mosses and lichens of the Silurian evolved into bushes that put down deep roots and weren't
dependent on surface water to survive.
And so they expanded across the continents.
And as they did so, they sucked out carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and that once
again cooled the earth.
It's possible this cooling helped contribute to a mass extinction in the oceans, the earth's
second mass extinction.
The cooling continued into the next geological period, the Carboniferous.
And with a cooler earth came retreating sea levels.
Shallow seas and swamps were left behind.
The wandering continents of Gondwanaland and Euramerica came together again to form a
another supercontinent, Pangaea.
West Africa collided with the eastern seaboard of North America and the Appalachian Mountains,
which had first risen during the Ordovician and been worn down, were again buckled and
uplifted like the crumple zone of a car crash.
Bushes evolved into the first trees and huge forests covered the swamps.
Fish that could use their fins as limbs to negotiate the roots and stems gained an evolutionary
advantage in the hunt for food and evolved into the first tetrapods, four-legged animals
that were the forerunners of lizards, dinosaurs and mammals.
The proliferation of plant life increased the oxygen content of the atmosphere.
Because insects absorb oxygen through their skin, that allowed them to grow to enormous
size.
But as well as releasing oxygen, the forests also took in huge amounts of carbon dioxide
in order to grow.
Only that carbon would be released back into the atmosphere when the trees died and decayed.
But during the Carboniferous, the vegetation sank into shallow swamps where oxygen levels
were low and didn't decompose.
After millions of years of compression and heating, these layers of wood and vegetation
turned into coal seams.
This paleomap of the Carboniferous in Europe shows how the shallow water coincides with
the coal fields of Germany, Britain, Poland and Northern France.
The falling carbon dioxide concentration cooled the earth so much that it once again triggered
an ice age.
Sea levels dropped even further and the Carboniferous swamp forests began to disappear.
The tetrapods of the Carboniferous had evolved into a weird looking clade of reptiles called
synapsids and were still a long time before the appearance of the dinosaurs.
The supercontinent Pangaea was now so large that rain clouds rarely penetrated the interior,
creating huge deserts.
Offshore a ring of smaller continents enclosed a sea called the Tethys that would have a
profound effect on our economy 250 million years later.
Algae and plankton thrived in this warm tropical sea.
When they died, they fell to the bottom and got buried in mud.
There was only a weak circulation system in the Tethys, a bit like the Black Sea today,
so organic matter didn't decay in the stagnant oxygen-free depths.
This build-up of organic sediment in the Tethys would continue for hundreds of millions of
years throughout the next four geological periods, uninterrupted by mountain building
or tectonic subsidence.
Over time the buried sediment got compressed and heated and formed sedimentary rock.
The organic matter trapped in the mud was also heated and broke down into simple hydrocarbons,
in other words oil and gas.
The mud turned into shale, which is a flaky permeable rock.
Meanwhile on the other side of the continent was another stagnant sea covering much of
what's now the western part of North America.
Called the Permian Basin, it also collected organic matter buried in mud and sand that
turned into shale and sandstone.
This would eventually give us the oil shales and oil sands of the United States and Canada.
Towards the end of the Permian, molten rock and gas from the upper mantle forced its way
up through the crust in Siberia and released what's called a flood basalt.
It poured billions of tonnes of carbon dioxide back into the atmosphere, pushing temperatures
up again into hothouse conditions and another mass extinction followed.
This would mark the boundary of the Permian and the next geological period, the Triassic.
In this mass extinction, 95% of the species on Earth disappeared.
The Triassic is a rather boring period in geological terms.
There was little mountain building taking place because all the continents were now
joined into a supercontinent that stretched from pole to pole.
Even though the sun was weaker back then, the high levels of carbon dioxide ensured
it was way too hot for ice at either pole.
The hothouse produced featureless deserts and many of the rocks from that period are
characterised by red wind-blurned sands.
Most animals had gone extinct, so in the early Triassic there weren't even many fossils
to make the period interesting.
The mass extinction opened up opportunities for the survivors because every organism inhabits
a niche, a specialist role which can exploit resources.
So when a lot of niches are suddenly opened up, animals will evolve to fill them.
One of them was a tiny shrew-like burrowing animal that gave birth to live young and suckled
them, the ancestor of all mammals.
Another was an animal called the archosaur.
The Triassic ended with another mass extinction, although the cause of this is not yet well
understood.
The archosaurs survived that one too.
So when niches opened up at the start of the next period, the Jurassic, the archosaur filled
them by evolving into the most famous ancient animals of all, the dinosaurs.
During the Jurassic, Pangaea began to break apart.
A rift opened up between Norway and Greenland, and then the eastern seaboard of the United
States pulled away from West Africa.
This was the birth of the Atlantic Ocean.
In the western part of the Tethys Sea, Europe was just a patchwork of islands and crustal
plates.
Thick layers of limestone built up in these shallow seas millions of years later, providing
the building material for Europe's great cathedrals.
The limestone was also important for another reason.
In the Tethys Sea, a constant stream of organic material had been buried in mud since the
Permian.
As limestone and sandstone piled up on top, the pressure and heat turned the organic material
into oil and gas and the mud into shale.
The oil and gas worked its way up through these permeable and porous rocks until it
hit impermeable rock in folds and along fault lines, unconformities, and salt domes where
less dense layers of salt laid down by evaporating seas move upwards through denser rock.
These places where oil gets stuck because it can't move up any further are called
traps.
Tethys look for them by bouncing sound waves off the rocks below.
When they find them, the exploration drilling team goes in to see if the traps contain oil.
And in the Mediterranean and the North Sea, that was my job.
So why does the Middle East have so much oil?
Not only because over hundreds of millions of years the Tethys was a stable collecting
point for trillions of tonnes of dead organic matter, but also because the shales, limestones
and evaporites ensured that the Middle East was full of oil traps.
It's in the rock formations of the Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous that 70% of the modern
world's oil is found.
The plants and animals that formed this oil took their carbon dioxide from CO2 in the
atmosphere and of course buried it with them.
So once again carbon dioxide levels fell, helped by the background process of chemical
weathering that created the Jurassic limestone.
The falling concentration of CO2 lowered global temperature and took the Earth out
of its hothouse.
As Pangaea broke up, moisture and ocean winds penetrated the arid interior.
Conifer forests filled with ferns spread across the islands and continents.
The first dinosaurs to dominate this new landscape were the sauropods.
Contrary to Hollywood myth, the Jurassic wasn't the true age of the dinosaurs, they really
flourished during the next geological period, the Cretaceous.
This is where we get Tyrannosaurus rex and lots of other familiar dinosaurs.
The Cretaceous was also marked by a series of flood basalt events in India that poured
trillions of tonnes of carbon dioxide back into the air.
As CO2 concentrations rose, so did the temperature.
By the late Cretaceous, the Earth was in hothouse conditions again.
I often hear people point to the Cretaceous hothouse as a wonderful time when dinosaurs
flourished when there was thick forest and warm weather at the poles.
Wouldn't it be nice if the Earth was like that today?
Well, yes, there were large areas of natural forest during the Cretaceous, just as there
are today.
And of course with a warmer climate comes higher sea levels, exacerbated during the
Cretaceous by crustal movement.
With no water locked up in ice at the poles, and with warmer water expanding, the oceans
covered the Great Plains of North America and nearly all of Europe, the Middle East,
North Africa and Central Asia.
In fact the areas that cover most of today's farmland and population centres were underwater.
So perhaps it's not a climate we'd want to emulate.
In these warm seas, tiny plankton called coccolithophores thrived.
Their shells fell to the sea floor and built up a thick layer of chalk.
This is so much a characteristic rock of the period that the Cretaceous takes its name
from the Latin word for chalk.
The outpouring of gases and lava led to falling dinosaur's numbers and they were finally
killed off by a huge asteroid impact marking the end of the Cretaceous and the start of
the Tertiary, or the Paleogene and Neogene as they call it in the United States.
It's likely the only surviving dinosaurs were smaller, feathered species that most researchers
now conclude evolved into birds.
For the tiny burrowing mammals that also survived, the world was now full of vacant niches into
which they evolved.
The herds of large grazing dinosaurs were replaced by large grazing mammals.
The pack hunting carnivore dinosaurs were replaced by pack hunting carnivore mammals.
But how do we know that one group of animals replaced another, or that one group of animals
evolved into another?
The answer takes us back to the basic geological principle that newer sediment overlays older
sediment.
Let's look at an analogy.
Imagine there's a garbage dump outside Lincoln, California which was started when the town
was founded in 1890, about the time households began using telephones.
Within a few years, broken or discarded telephones would be thrown into the Lincoln garbage dump
in the same way dead animals fall to the bottom of the sea.
Over time, other garbage piles up on top.
As the telephone evolved into better and more efficient models, these got dumped on top
too, above the older ones.
Telephones dating from the 1920s are different again, so when they got thrown out they end
up here, and so on.
Through the 1940s, 50s and 60s, right up to the era of mobile phones.
But even mobile phones are evolving, and when older models get thrown away, they get buried
underneath newer models.
So if archaeologists 20,000 years from now uncover this garbage dump, they'll be able
to tell which telephones were older and which were newer, based on where they lie in the
strata.
So if the archaeologists found a pile of garbage elsewhere in California, they'd be able to
instantly place it in the chronology, based on the type of phone they find there.
Similarly, as a general principle, we get newer fossils lying on top of older ones.
So just like the phones, we can see small differences as these animals evolved over
time.
If I can date a rock which has a particular fossil in it, and I find another rock with
an identical fossil thousands of miles away, then there's a very good chance both rocks
are of the same age.
The breakup of Pangaea during the Cretaceous gave rise to another era of drifting continents
and continental collisions during the Tertiary.
India crashed into Asia, thrusting up the Himalayas.
Africa collided with Europe, pushing up the Alps.
The subduction of oceanic plates gave rise to the Andes Mountains and the mountains of
New Zealand and Japan.
This era of mountain building sped up chemical weathering that once again sucked carbon dioxide
out of the air, which cooled the Earth and sparked its fifth ice age, covering a period
called the Quaternary.
This is the shortest of our geological time periods, just one minute before now on our
time clock.
It wouldn't even rate a mention, except for the fact that it's the period we happen
to live in.
Our ice age isn't a uniform period of cold.
It's characterised by cycles called glaciations and interglacials.
The transition is sparked by tiny amounts of warming and cooling, as the Earth's tilt
and orbit regularly change the pattern of sunlight it receives.
Normally these orbital cycles make little difference to the temperature of the Earth,
but during an ice age, even the tiniest amount of warming and cooling gets amplified by what's
called positive feedback.
That's because a little bit of warming can melt a little bit of ice, reducing the amount
of sunlight it reflects, therefore amplifying the warming.
The melting of the ice unlocks methane from frozen soils, and a little bit of warming
causes the oceans to release carbon dioxide.
Both are powerful greenhouse gases.
During glaciations, much of the Earth's water is locked up in ice, and much of the
water that remains in the oceans is cold, so it shrinks.
During deglaciations, most of the ice melts and the warm waters expand, so sea levels
rose and fell by several hundred feet between glacial cycles.
Because of the regular cyclical nature of glacials and interglacials, a lot of posters
on my channel seem to believe that the Earth's geological history consists of cycles.
In nearly every case, it turns out that they are confusing different periods of geological
history, so let's put this in perspective.
This red dot represents the last 1000 years on the bottom timescale, and here's the
last 650,000 years, a third of our current ice age, comprising glacial and interglacial
cycles.
None of these orbital cycles affect the climate during your lifetime or mine.
They're on a scale of thousands of years, and the next time they begin sending us back
into another glaciation will be long after your great-great-great-great-great-grandchildren
have been dead and forgotten by their great-great-great-great-grandchildren.
And this is where the entire ice age stands in relation to the last 500 million years.
In relation to our geological clock, it's just one second out of eight hours, two million
years out of a billion.
For most of the last 500 million years, outside of these very short ice ages, orbital cycles
have no discernible influence on global temperature, because the changes in insolation they produce
are far too weak.
As for continental drift, flood basalt events, CO2 concentration, global temperature, solar
irradiance and other constantly changing features of the Earth, these don't follow regular cycles,
either in time or amplitude.
But no need to go to the other extreme and say that the whole system is chaotic either.
With the exception of flood basalts and continental rifting, the mechanisms which cause these
events are pretty well understood.
We know they follow basic principles of physics, we know that most of them are linked, and
in some cases they're even predictable.
So just to be clear, these glacial cycles aren't ice ages, and they don't represent
the Earth's geological history.
They're part of an ice age, and make up just one minute of the eight hours on our geological
clock.
It's a history that includes at least five ice ages, five mass extinctions and hundreds
of millions of years of hothouse.
Our Earth has experienced a world of deserts, a world devoid of plant life, a world of ice
and a world of water.
So here we are today, at one o'clock in the afternoon, in a warm interglacial that's
a pretty pleasant place to live, and has given rise to the civilisation we now enjoy.
And what of the future?
Well according to researchers, our interglacial should last about another 20,000 years, giving
us a benign climate and stable sea levels for thousands more generations.
Unless, of course, we stuff that up.
But tens of thousands of years is the blink of an eye in geological terms.
If we look tens of millions of years into the future, Australia will continue drifting
northwards, Africa will close the gap with Europe and squeeze out the Mediterranean Sea,
and the two American continents will separate.
250 million years from now, our mountain chains will have worn down, new ones will
have risen, and all the continents will be fused into yet another supercontinent.
This will be three o'clock in the afternoon on our geological clock.
Will our species survive until then?
Well the dinosaurs lasted 160 million years before going extinct, so if humans can survive
as long as that, the answer is no.
We won't be around 250 million years from now, but perhaps geologists of this future
world, whatever they look like, will develop the same technology we have to delve into
the past.
They'll notice a sharp rise in carbon dioxide, accompanied by a sharp rise in temperature
from our geological period.
But this time there won't be any flood basalts to explain it.
They'll dig through rocks uplifted and eroded over hundreds of millions of years and find
evidence of a sea level rise that buried strange geometric stones.
They'll see signs of the Earth's sixth mass extinction and a sudden disappearance of forests.
All this in the blink of an eye, 0.0005 seconds on our geological clock, which is actually
200 times faster than the blink of an eye.
And from time to time, since land fossils aren't as well preserved as marine fossils,
these future geologists will find bits of fossilized bone in the ancient rock that suggest
the presence of some kind of upright primate.
They'll no doubt wonder if there's any link.
you
