Hehehehe, Wacky Willigis News.
Yes, on Wacky Willigis News we're not afraid to pick up news that's nine months old and
pretend it's a 2014 retrospective.
So did you spot the blasphemy in this Pakistan TV wedding?
Was it the sexual tension graphically expressed during a religious ceremony, the insulting
poking of the eye as if snubbing Allah, or the holding up of shoes viewed through the
Islamic world as a covering for the lowest form of the human anatomy?
Well this TV wedding was shown on Pakistan's GeoTV, so let's go to rival Ari TV for the
answer.
Yes, that's right.
Holding up a pair of shoes is not normally blasphemy, but it is blasphemy when the shoes
are held up during the playing of a traditional wedding song about the wedding of Muhammad's
daughter.
You might just as well run up to the prophet, pull his beard and tweak him on the nose.
Now to infidels, the idea that this is blasphemy may sound wacky.
But what's even more wacky is that no one's really sure why the TV clip was blasphemous.
Some thought the song itself was blasphemous, but as we've seen, Ari TV went with the shoes.
Convinced it was good for ratings, they piled on the charge that GeoTV are a bunch of blasphemers.
Blasphemy!
He said it again!
But here's what really makes this a deserving item for wacky religious news.
By showing the offending clip in order to highlight the blasphemy, Ari TV itself was
accused of blasphemy.
Get the feeling life is imitating art, or in this case, religion is imitating comedy.
Right, we'll get the stage over.
That's right.
What makes a hilariously funny comedy sketch one year gets passed into actual religious
law the next.
Yes, it would be funny if it wasn't so deadly serious.
Every week there are news reports of people being arrested, shot, lynched or hacked to
death in Pakistan because of some alleged blasphemy.
According to Reuters, even showing evidence of blasphemy in a Pakistani court can be blasphemous.
So this gives us here at Wacky Religious News an idea.
Instead of trying to abolish blasphemy laws, we say, make them stronger.
If someone accuses his neighbour of blasphemy, he has to explain what the blasphemy was,
just as Ari TV did, and by repeating it he can be charged with blasphemy himself.
The police officer who takes the accused to a public prosecutor has to explain the charges
in detail, and that gets the police officer arrested for blasphemy.
I wonder how long it would be before everyone's so afraid of committing blasphemy that blasphemy
charges are no longer laid against anyone.
What if they do say Jehovah?
Now on to news of the apocalypse.
Hi guys, a couple of days ago a sinkhole appeared close to an area where we live.
And this isn't the first time we've heard about sinkholes.
We've been hearing about them all across the world for the last few years.
Oh, so these things have only been happening in the last few years.
This video by the two preachers goes on to document several sinkholes claiming they're
a sign of the end times.
What else could be causing these miraculous signs of Jesus' second coming?
So you've seen the videos.
They're pretty crazy really.
Over the last few years there's been a real acceleration of these sinkholes.
I've never even heard of them when I grew up as a boy, but now they're just everywhere.
Look, gay preachers, just because you only woke up to something happening last week when
you watched a compilation YouTube video doesn't mean this phenomenon is new or that it's accelerating
in frequency.
We can see sinkholes that are thousands of years old, and we can read about sinkholes
that happened a hundred years ago.
Scientific studies were done to explain why they happen.
If you really think they're miraculous, why is it God chooses to make them only at old
mining sites or in areas of limestone, where erosion causes underground caverns to be formed?
Coincidence?
And if you've noticed from those videos, you'll see that a lot of these sinkholes are happening
in urban areas.
They're not happening in the countryside so much, but mainly in urban areas.
And by pure coincidence, a lot of urban areas were built close to mining sites because miners
needed somewhere to live.
And as urban areas expand, a lot of them are spreading over abandoned mines.
If we're seeing more videos of them on the news or on YouTube, it could be because more
of them are happening, or it could be because there are more people with mobile phones to
film them.
What I mean is, could there be other perfectly natural explanations for the fact that more
sinkhole videos are appearing on YouTube, other than the possibility that this is a
sign of the coming of Jesus?
You know, who's really heard of these things happening, you know, a hundred years ago?
I've never heard really so much of this stuff happening, but it seems to be happening.
Hello gay preachers, I said could there be other perfectly natural explanations?
Heavy rain, erosion, et cetera, it seems to be happening across the world.
Breaking news!
Wacky religious news has just learned that a heap of land has slid down a hillside in
Italy.
We can confidently say this has never happened before, ever, in the entire history of mankind.
Hold on, we've just heard about another one.
Oh, and apparently there was another one last week in Mexico.
How come we've never heard about sliding land before?
These land slides, as we'll call them, obviously started happening last week when we became
aware of them.
So the gay preachers are right, Jesus is coming.
This has been wacky religious news.
