What you do need to take into account here is that people base their lives on your projections
and it turned out that none of it was true. You painted a doomsday climate change scenario,
farmers, city planners, taxpayers, they believe, none of it was correct. So you can't just
admonish them now. You can't just look down your nose at them now and say, well, I can't,
why wouldn't you, why wouldn't you believe us, you silly bumpkin? Well, because of you.
I don't believe you. You lied last time. You don't believe science?
What's got Steven Crowder and his friends worked up is a projection about water levels in the
Great Lakes, just one of many forecasts related to the consequences of climate change.
You might be forgiven for thinking he's attacking researchers for getting their projections wrong.
In fact, he was citing this prediction by a politician.
What we're seeing in global warming is the evaporation of our Great Lakes.
It's a scary thing.
And this prediction from a news article.
And here we have an article from USA Today. I remember this article. I think it was in 2012,
2013. They said it would take decades of rain, decades of rain, heavy, heavy rain,
just to return to normal. OK, it took two years. Actually, the article didn't say anything of the
sort. I tracked it down where it talked about the restoration of lake levels. It wasn't quoting
a scientific study. It was quoting a retired hydrologist who said it would take years of
consistent rain to return Lake Michigan and Lake Huron to normal. So, no, not decades of rain.
But Crowder was spot on with his criticism of the politician. Now, Senator Durbin's right in
saying we get evaporation from the Great Lakes. And according to scientific research, that's been
increasing because of higher water temperatures and diminished ice cover. But he either didn't
know or didn't mention that this evaporation is offset by water coming in from the catchment area.
When you say levels will undeniably, undoubtedly continue to descend to record low levels due to
climate change and exclusively climate change, they have to plan their seasons for things like
more erosion, less underpass room for waterway bridges. They have to plan extensive dredging of
harbors. City engineering comes into play, not to mention the private businesses. They have to
adjust their business models based on your projections of shorefront. Crowder did say in
the video that he wasn't going to look at the science, but perhaps he should. Because business
managers, town planners and farmers don't base their lives or future plans on a claim by a senator.
They plan based on properly conducted peer-reviewed scientific research.
So what does the science say? Far from predicting scary evaporation, the 2007
International Upper Great Lakes study found that future lake levels would remain within the
historical range. The most recent long-term projections by the US Army Corps of Engineers,
which is responsible for monitoring the Great Lakes, only looks ahead five years. But their
conclusion was that during that time, water levels would vary more, but with an average higher than
the historical range. Where are we now? Lake Superior is already near record high levels.
By May could reach a record that was set in the mid 1980s. Lake Erie could reach record highs
later this spring. Lake Michigan and Huron also expected to be much higher, much, much higher
than historically normal levels. It only took a few years to get to significantly higher than
normal levels. And I remember this because I was in Michigan. Fair enough, Stephen, but why didn't
you tell your listeners that this is exactly what scientific studies had predicted? Anyway, this
video isn't about the Great Lakes or Stephen Crowder. It just so happened he released a video
rubbishing climate predictions at the same time I was researching this video about climate
predictions, so it made a very good point. People often misrepresent the science, but that's not an
exclusively left-wing or a right-wing phenomenon. It's done by politicians, op-ed writers, lobbyists
and bloggers on both sides of the political spectrum. But through all this misrepresentation
and political squabbling, an important fact has been overlooked. That scientific studies in this
field have a very good track record in getting their projections right, just as they did with
the Great Lakes. And if you're already gasping in disbelief at that, it probably means you've
been spending way too much time listening to bloggers and political pundits. The same goes
for this popular list of supposedly failed scientific conclusions from Fox News, copied
by this vlogger and many others. Here now are the top 10 global warming predictions
gotten wrong. Number 10 from the UK came this prediction. Within a few years, a scientist said,
children just aren't going to know what snow is. Snowfall will be very rare. That, according to
Dr David Vinner, senior research scientist at the Climate Research Unit, CRU, East Anglia.
Yes, and I've debunked this claim myself. It's not based on any scientific study. It comes from
a newspaper interview and it's nonsense. Of course, a lot of people will be saying,
but he's a scientist. Surely anything scientists say must be based on scientific research.
Well, if you've watched my channel, you'll know that scientists spout all sorts of crap when
they're not confined to the rigorous demands of scientific publishing. The reason we have
peer-reviewed scientific publishing is to ensure that conclusions are supported by evidence.
Calculations and analyses have to be done strictly according to the scientific method.
That's why, to use Steven Crowder's yardstick, planners, farmers and business people
base their lives and futures on properly published science, not random statements in newspapers and
on TV. Dr Viner didn't cite a study that supported his claim and the independent newspaper didn't ask
for one. But I did, and here's the lame response I got from the organisation Viner worked for.
In other words, the answer is no. There's no scientific study supporting his claim.
Bloggers have tried to cite other predictions of no more snow. Most, like Viner's, are completely
unsupported by scientific studies. But this one supposedly comes from the IPCC, and the allegation
that the prediction failed has been mindlessly copied by other bloggers who never bothered to
check it. Here's the statement from the IPCC report they quote. In the North America section,
bottom paragraph here, it says milder winter temperatures will decrease heavy snowstorms,
but could cause an increase in freezing rain. The section a bit further down that the bloggers
never cite is this prediction. Fewer periods of extreme cold, fewer snowstorms, although there
may be an increase in the number of intense storms. This blogger claims the prediction is
wrong because the northern hemisphere's snow area shows remarkably little change since 1967.
But the prediction wasn't for the northern hemisphere, it was for North America.
It wasn't a prediction about snow area, but about snow storms. There was no mention of a
start point in 1967, and no mention of an end point in 2017. It's no good debunking
a prediction if your yardstick is something completely different to that of the prediction.
Of course, if you're living in a part of the USA affected by those snowstorms,
it won't look as though the continent is getting milder, but remember that there are other places
in North America besides where you live. Even a year before the independent story came out,
another scientific study was also predicting more intense snowstorms. According to the researchers'
model, as ice melts in the Arctic, it'll create a high pressure zone moving cold air further south
in winter. And because of a weakened jet stream, another consequence of global warming that I
explained in my video on hurricanes, this cold air will no longer be contained within the Arctic
circle. It'll spill out, bringing Arctic weather conditions to Europe and North America.
The prediction of colder Arctic air moving south was so accurate that a projected meteorological
pattern from Petakov and Semenov's 2010 paper looks almost identical to a mass of Arctic air
that swept Europe a few years later, and a similar pattern has now hit the United States several
years running. The red areas are where temperatures are well above normal, the blue areas are where
it's well below normal. It looks as though the Arctic is warming so fast that freezing air is
being pushed out further south, and essentially that's what's happening. So when it comes to an
end to snow, the newspaper may have got it wrong, but the scientific predictions, the ones backed
by peer-reviewed scientific research, were unfortunately all too accurate. Number nine,
by 1995 the greenhouse effect will be desolating the hard land of North America and Eurasia with
horrific drought causing crop failures and riots. By 1996 the Platte River of Nebraska will be dry,
that according to Michael Oppenheimer. But according to Fox News, which compiled the list,
this claim came from a book, not a scientific study. So again we have to find out what the
science says. NOAA, which made a study of the midwest, looked at the trend over the next 90
years based on a number of different scenarios, and the Met Office looked ahead to the year 2100.
Both predicted that the midwest would get drier and hotter over the next century,
but no scientific study predicted that climate change would look like this in midwestern states
by 1995 or 1996. Number eight, arctic specialist Brent Belkom says a general warming trend over
the north pole is melting the polar ice cap and may produce an ice-free arctic ocean by the year
2000. Arctic specialist? Well he was a Norwegian aviator in the 1930s who flew a lot in the arctic,
but no prizes for guessing that he never wrote a scientific study on future melting,
he was simply giving his opinion to a newspaper. Predictions about the arctic also pop up regularly
in my channel fora, but all too often the experts in their field turn out to be Al Gore, who's not
an expert and hasn't published a study on arctic ice. Al Gore's claim is based on something a
researcher called Wieslaw Maslowski said at a meeting of the American Geophysical Union in 2007,
that the arctic might be ice-free during the summer within five years.
Nearly all the peer-reviewed studies at the time were predicting an ice-free summer arctic decades
ahead, around 2070. In fact, later measurements showed that the arctic is melting much faster
than predicted, so most recent studies have brought the date forward, closer to the range of between
2040 and 2060. According to Fox News, which compiled the list, AP got this from a study by
the Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc, but it doesn't say where the study was published
or from when this temperature rise is supposed to be measured or what the margin of error is.
It's impossible to compare this prediction if we don't know what it was predicting.
In its rebuttal, Fox News cites global temperatures, but the study itself supposedly
cited nationwide temperatures. But if Fox News wants to look at global temperatures, there's a
much more famous prediction from that time that does that, and one that bloggers frequently cite
as a failure. In 1988, James Hansen looked at forcing bicarbon dioxide based on three possible
scenarios, depending on what governments and industry decided to do in the next few decades.
Scenario A showed what would happen to temperatures if no action was taken to curb CO2 emissions
and there was exponential growth. In other words, the growth in CO2 concentration accelerated.
Scenario B showed temperatures assuming some action was taken to curb CO2 emissions
and there was a linear rate of growth. And Scenario C showed temperatures assuming cuts
in CO2 emissions. As it turned out, action was taken to curb CO2 emissions,
thanks in large part to the Kyoto Protocol. So Scenario A was avoided. What the world ended up
with was linear growth, Scenario B. This is what Hansen predicted would be the temperature rise,
30 years on, how does that compare with the actual temperature rise?
Pretty much spot on. Hansen used a climate sensitivity of 4.2 degrees centigrade for
his projection, whereas more recent research shows the sensitivity
closer to 3 degrees centigrade. If 3 degrees is used, the projection is even more accurate.
Now of course, people who spend all their time in chat rooms and blogs
hearing the mantra that the models are wrong are not going to accept this. I get it. You've
seen graphs that show something completely different. So where did those come from?
In 1998, a climatologist called Patrick Michaels told a House of Representatives committee that
actual temperature measurements had failed to follow the projection made by Hansen 10 years
earlier. As evidence, he showed Hansen's three different scenarios and compared them to actual
temperatures. At least that's what he should have done. What he actually did was airbrush out the
scenario that followed the real rise in CO2 concentration, and only showed the projected
temperature rise caused by accelerating CO2 emissions, a scenario that never happened.
It's hard to dismiss this as a mistake, because Michaels is a qualified research climatologist
and understands how projections work, and he knew what the measured rise in CO2 was.
But I should mention that he was no longer a research climatologist
when he testified. Four years earlier, he'd started a lobbying company,
sorry, an advocacy company, called New Hope Environmental Services.
I can't tell you who funds him. I'll let Patrick Michaels tell you himself.
What I'm saying is that...
Is your research funded by these industries?
Not largely. The fact of the matter is...
Can I ask you what percentage of your work is funded by the petroleum industry?
I don't know. 40%? I don't know.
There's nothing wrong with being an advocate for oil industry interests,
and that shouldn't matter or make any difference, as long as his testimony to Congress in 1998
was scientifically accurate. Unfortunately, it wasn't.
In fact, it was so misleading that it caused a senior spokesperson for the
libertarian Cato Institute to change his mind when he discovered the deception.
The Cato Institute is a political organization also lobbying against climate change.
Patrick Michaels and Jerry Taylor were their most prominent spokesmen.
Not being a scientist, Taylor simply repeated Michael's claims
that Hansen's forecasts were way off.
After one particular TV interview where he gave the usual talking points,
he describes what happened next.
After we got done with the programme and were back in the green room getting the make-up off,
Joe said to me,
Did you even read that testimony you've just talked about?
And when I told him it had been a while, he said,
I'm daring you to go back and double-check this.
He told me that some of Hansen's projections were spot on.
So I went back to my office and I re-read Hansen's testimony, and Joe was correct.
So then I talked to the climate skeptics who had made this argument to me,
and it turns out they'd done so with full knowledge that they were being misleading.
Taylor, by the way, is still with the Cato Institute,
and he still advocates for his libertarian political views.
But he does so without having to misrepresent the science.
But Michaels is still running his company and still trying to discredit Hansen's prediction.
In this recent Wall Street Journal op-ed, he does show Scenario B,
but he's come up with a new airbrushing technique for pretending the temperatures don't match it,
as explained in the accompanying text.
Global surface temperature has not increased significantly since 2000,
discounting the larger-than-usual El Niño of 2015-16.
Well, that's a novel approach to getting the answer you want.
But El Niño is an integral part of the temperature pattern, as is La Niña.
Shown in blue here, La Niña is a period when the oceans suck in heat from the atmosphere,
and El Niño is a period when that heat is expelled.
If we go to the time period in question and look at the far right of the picture,
what Michaels has done is simply airbrush out the most recent El Niño
in order to make atmospheric temperatures look lower than they really are.
Now you see it, now you don't.
Of course, the most ardent conspiracy theorists will claim that the data showing temperature rise
and ice melt and glacier retreat and warming oceans are all fake,
and that geologists, oceanographers, climatologists, glaciologists,
journal editors and analysts of different nationalities in different countries
are all in on a huge worldwide conspiracy.
But even Patrick Michaels, Roy Spencer and other critics don't dispute the data.
If that's what they thought, they'd simply show the evidence for that,
rather than resort to all this airbrushing.
So how have the predictions of the critics been doing?
A few researchers thought other factors were a bigger forcing than carbon dioxide
and predicted that the Earth would cool.
Don Easterbrook predicted that a Pacific Ocean cycle known as the PDO
would send temperatures lower, and he predicted worldwide cooling.
But all three of his predictions turned out to be way under actual temperatures.
They were not just wrong, they were headed in completely the wrong direction.
Richard Lindzen thought cloud cover provided the Earth with a mechanism
which kept the Earth's temperatures stable.
Nice idea, but his prediction also turned out to be way out.
Willy Soon claimed the Sun drives global temperatures,
but that prediction fizzled out when solar irradiance and global temperatures
went in completely opposite directions.
I wanted to go through the whole list, but I've already run out of time.
You can debunk the rest of the list yourself, simply by checking where the claim came from,
whether the prediction has been accurately reported by Fox News,
and whether it's based on a scientific study.
So let's close, as always, by looking at what the science says.
The scientific prediction that increased CO2 would cause temperature rise
is now well over a century old.
As far back as the 1950s, this had been quantified so accurately
that the rate of warming was close to actual values.
And from that, researchers could make other predictions.
They predicted decades ago that increased levels of CO2
would cause the Greenland and West Antarctica ice sheets to start melting.
And that prediction was correct.
This graph shows the loss of Greenland ice since 2002,
and now West Antarctica is also measurably losing ice.
Studies predicted warmer oceans,
and as we've seen, that prediction was correct.
Decades ago, they predicted that global warming would lead to more evaporation
and higher water vapour content in the atmosphere.
Correct.
Decades ago, researchers predicted that high northern latitudes
would warm much faster than lower latitudes.
Another correct prediction.
Shrinking Arctic sea ice was predicted.
Again, this prediction goes back decades, long before the ice was measurably shrinking.
The only prediction that was wrong was the IPCC's estimate of how fast the ice would shrink.
It's actually happening much faster.
And researchers predicted that glaciers worldwide would retreat,
and that's happening worldwide.
A few glaciers are advancing because of local factors,
but the vast majority are shrinking.
And so we get into the phenomena that follow on from these changes.
Of course, it's not hard to figure out that warmer oceans, which increase in volume,
and melting ice, which adds more water to the oceans, both result in sea level rise.
Even critics don't deny that.
What they say is that we're not seeing it.
Same with drought, flooding, and stronger hurricanes.
We're just not seeing it.
Of course, that's true if what you're expecting is that by now the Midwest should be a desert,
the Arctic should be ice-free, the Great Lakes should be drying up,
and New York should be underwater.
We've already seen what the scientific predictions really are for the Midwest,
Arctic ice, and the Great Lakes.
And as for New York, James Hansen didn't predict that the city would be underwater by 2018,
or Manhattan, or even parts of Manhattan for that matter.
Of course, I'm going to get a lot of posts insisting that he did.
So before you post, here's an idea.
Do what Jerry Taylor did.
Don't just repeat talking points because that's what you've read in a hundred blogs,
or because that's what you think you're supposed to believe.
Like Jerry Taylor, go back and check your facts.
In this case, check where Hansen supposedly said this and find out what he actually said.
Then see if there's a scientific study that supports what he actually said.
If people still believe this myth then I'll be very happy to make a video
showing how to track it back to its source.
What researchers have predicted is that sea levels will rise about three feet this century.
That's an average of about 10 millimetres a year.
Sea levels are currently rising at about three millimetres a year, in line with predictions,
and accelerating as the oceans heat up and ice melt accelerates.
That may not be as dramatic as this, but the scientific conclusion is that it'll destroy
coastal infrastructure, cause coastal erosion, salination, and storm surges.
Some low-lying areas are already feeling that.
If nothing else is done to curb the rise in CO2 emissions,
the scientific prediction is for continuing sea level rise into the future.
We're certainly seeing the destruction of coral reefs because of rising ocean temperatures,
and that will affect fish stocks and coastal erosion.
With droughts, forest fires, and floods, it's much harder to detect the global warming signal
among the general shifts in weather patterns,
a bit like trying to detect smoking as the cause of lung cancer in a patient.
But the more patients you have, the easier it is to detect a pattern.
So in recent years, researchers have become more confident
that the record floods, droughts, and forest fires we're seeing,
and record strong hurricanes are the result of global warming.
As for reduced water supply because of glacial melt,
that's another prediction that's now discernible.
I do understand why people might be confused about all these misleading messages on the
blogosphere about what the science actually says.
But the solution is pretty simple.
Tune out bloggers' opinions and go to reputable scientific institutions like,
if you're an American, the National Academy of Sciences,
the National Snow and Ice Data Center,
the American Association for the Advancement of Science,
NASA, the American Chemical Society,
the American Geophysical Union,
the American Meteorological Society,
the Federation of American Scientists,
the Geological Society of America,
or the United States Geological Survey.
Most of them have information about global warming and climate change
that reflects what's in the scientific literature.
If you're a conspiracy theorist and you don't trust them,
then go to websites run by respected scientific institutions in other countries
like the Royal Society, the Meteorological Office,
the Geological Survey, or the Royal Meteorological Society in the UK,
or the French Academy of Sciences,
the German Academy of Natural Sciences,
the Max Planck Institute,
the Royal Society of Canada,
the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences,
the Science Council of Japan,
or the Denmark Meteorological Institute.
I'm not disagreeing with people like Crowder who say that some predictions are wrong
if he's citing politicians and newspaper stories,
even if the newspaper story didn't say what he thought it said.
But if a lot of these people are getting their predictions wrong,
and peer-reviewed scientific studies are getting them right,
then surely the answer is go with the science.
