These were ice cubes, not five minutes ago, mostly.
This is sweating like a horned turd.
Mmm, salty water.
Salty water.
Mmm.
Mmm-mmm.
Okay, so today's drink of choice is the margarita, because it's fucking hot outside.
Alright, so, cheers.
Cheers to the heat wave ending, and to our project continuing.
Yep.
Okay, so, we haven't read any actual comments comments for a few episodes, because we've
been too wrapped up in the actual process, so...
So I mean, the question of last time was, you know, should we self-publish or should
we publish?
And the comments were very right down the middle, in regards to, no, self-publish, like,
these are the reasons why, no, go the traditional route, these are the reasons why.
My favorite comment was from Shiny McShine, who wrote, what, are you crazy?
Take the real publisher.
Just bear in mind that this will all end with both of you looking in the fancy mirrors
and your Upper East Side penthouse and saying, who am I?
But what the hell, mirrors have an off switch.
It's called your rich, drunken fist.
Well, that is funny, I think this person might overestimate how much money there is in publishing.
Yeah, right?
I mean, there were some comments that really pointed out that with self-publishing, um,
we don't have to answer to anyone in regards to why we're doing this.
Because that was one issue we were finding with the publishing house that did contact
us, which was that they wanted us to transform it into something more National Lampoon's
parody-like.
Yeah, like, they kind of wanted, the impression I got was they wanted something more in the
vein of Pride and Prejudice and Zombies, where the gimmick is right on the cover.
So no one, like, there's no confusion as to what this is.
Yeah.
And I got several people who actually, like, who left comments wanting me to clarify that,
hey, I make my living as an author.
So yeah, what I meant the outliers were, like, the, you know, EL James' super, super blockbuster
ones.
Yeah.
But, uh, yes, there are a lot of people that make their living through self-publishing
now.
Definitely.
And that is very cool.
Good on you, I'm jealous.
Erin The Red, uh, had some good questions.
A, she mentioned that the turnaround was long, I agree, um, but that he told me a year, so
I'll take his word for it.
And while part of the experiment was actually taking people through the, uh, process of
actually getting a book published, A, that turnaround, and B, I think self-publishing
is a process, too.
It's just a different process, but an increasingly relevant one.
Especially as if we look at, um, with self-publishing, though, what we'll be able to explore instead
is self-promotion.
Oh, yeah.
And what-
That stuff you have to do now, even if you are traditionally published, you as an author
have to-
Well, if you look at, like, the self-promotion that, um, uh, Hyperbole and a Half is now
doing.
Yeah.
Which is hilarious, by the way.
Buy my book, or I'll fill your feed with spiders.
But it works, but that's not easy for most people.
Yeah.
It wouldn't be easy for me.
Yeah.
Or I'd be like, hey, buy my book, or I'll talk about patriarchy some more.
I'll bore you-
Well, I'm trying to give tales.
I'll bore you with tales of gender inequity, so buy our Cthulhu book.
And third, this was her very good question, uh, why did you create Sarah Ellenson?
Are you trying to pull the wool over unsuspecting readers?
I used to make a statement about how these kinds of books are pastiche, uh, real literature
or something else, and that kind of is cynical.
And she makes the case that Naked Came the Stranger has come and gone.
And the point of that book was to point out, like, I'm gonna write the worst book possible
and people are gonna buy it.
And I'm gonna prove how stupid people are because they bought this awful book that I
wrote.
Well, why did we create Sarah?
It was because we wanted to create a character who would actually write this book.
Yeah.
Sarah is our author voice, which we kind of had to create in order to figure out what
the voice was.
And Sarah was very much based on real-life authors like, uh, Stephanie Meyer and E.L.
James and Colleen Houck, who wrote, uh, the Tiger Books and, you know, they would, they're
all these kind of really insecure women that, like, Stephanie Meyer, who, who she'd have
her brother go through her emails to delete the un, the, the not nice ones and Colleen
Houck who gets in good read fights with people who leave her bad reviews and E.L. James who
gets in Twitter fights.
The good read fights is what really, like, the, we wanted to create a character, a persona
that we could use to kind of fight with people who talk shit about our book because this
is what happens.
This, yeah, this is, in this age of instant gratification, social access with the author,
this is what we're reduced to, talking shit about each other on Goodreads.
So Nagy Came a Stranger had its moment, came and gone.
Yeah.
Um, it was, it was more about how stupid people are than what the industry is like, I feel.
We put a, I mean, like, as stupid as this project is, we put a lot of thought into it
and it was, I mean, like, the, While the Ruse is fun, it's a joke, it's, you know, it's,
we're not gonna, if, if someone comes on Goodreads, we're not gonna sit here and be like, ha ha,
you read our book and liked it, dumbass.
Like, the point, the whole point of the book is, like, we are hyperbolizing tropes that
we don't like.
So the whole point of Sarah was to basically create a character that is based on the Stephanie
Miles of the world, who can't take criticism, but also, like, wear their fantasies on the sleeve.
For me, it's more about, um, how things become popular, even when people can gather around
and be like, yeah, that's not very good.
Like, the room.
Yeah.
Which is awful.
But celebratedly so.
Yeah.
To me, it was more about isolating the sort of terrible elements that people liked and
taking them to their extreme extreme.
That was the point of the actual book to me.
And in that way, yes, it is definitely a parody and meant to be taken as such, but Poe's Law,
not everybody will.
Because we read it and we think it's hilarious, but not everyone might.
They might think, like, yeah, that would be really hot if he tied me to a chair.
But I think the thing about, like, movies like The Room and Birdemic and even Showgirls,
like these camp classics of badness, they didn't set out to be that.
Yeah.
Whereas something like, say, Blazing Saddles or Young Frankenstein, they're genre parodies,
but lovingly so.
So I don't really know where exactly we fall because we're, like, fascinated by Twilight
and that ilk, but I don't think we're fond of it.
Yeah.
But I guess we kind of are.
Otherwise we would have given up on this months ago.
Yeah.
It is a much more subtle parody than I think a mainstream audience might go for.
But that said...
Which I think is why Poe's Law is going to play so hard in this one if it reaches beyond
you, our viewing audience.
Yeah.
I mean, to us, it's super obviously a parody.
We shall see if people take it as super obviously a parody.
So I emailed him and I basically said, I think we could definitely talk about extending this
web series into being something that might be useful to them and doing a different sort
of funny book that is also crowd interactive like our last one was.
But maybe not this one.
Because I think we do kind of want to retain the creative control and I think people aren't
going to want to wait a year.
You know, a year from now they'll be like, what?
I forgot about that.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And what are we going to sit here and talk about for an entire year?
I want my instant gratification!
Yes.
Dang nabbit.
So, I think self-publishing is where it's at.
And what that means is we need to have an art contest for our cover and then we need
to do pre-release stuff.
We need to release a chapter for reading.
Oh yeah!
I think, oh, and did I mention that our friend Sarah now has a website.
So you can go onto Sarah's website and see the teaser chapter.
I forget which one it is.
The teaser.
I don't know.
Well, I guess you're just going to have to go to the website.
I think you're just going to have to go to the website and see for yourself.
It's going to be exciting.
Yeah.
Chapter 6 is great.
It's got stuff.
Riley.
And also, we are going to be at ConBravo next week and we will have a super, super, super
limited amount of very hastily printed copies of Awoken.
So ConBravo, you get to be the first.
Congratulations.
Congratulations.
So keep watching.
We will keep people abreast of the progress.
We'll also be actually talking to some literary agents on the actual camera.
Not in letter form.
We'll talk query letters and the market and how things are done now and that sort of fun
stuff.
And of course, we will start an art contest, very much like we did for the Ghostwriters
within the next few weeks and then you guys can do a thing and yes, we will pay you.
Yes.
Yes.
You will get paid for your contributions.
Tumblr.
We pay people.
And I look forward to what the future holds for our Frankenstein's monster, Sarah.
