This one is called the Vela Pulsar, and it's magnificent, a thousand light years away.
It's a highly magnetised neutron star.
You must remember this guy, Louis Giglio, who got very excited two years ago about a
chemical called laminin that was in the perfect shape of the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.
It's in the perfect shape of the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Or as I pointed out, a bit like the cross, a sort of wobbly crucifix better suited to
the crucifixion of mermaids.
But now he's at it again, and I bet you know what Giglio's going to say.
Here's a distant gas cloud in our galaxy that looks exactly like our Lord Jesus Christ,
right Louis?
And as it is oscillating you can see what's happening, it's shooting a radio frequency
out of itself.
Oh, okay, maybe it's not supposed to be a galactic portrait of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Um, I give up.
Because when they aimed the radio telescopes at the Vela Pulsar, this is what they heard.
Oh, I know, I know, the Vela Pulsar is going to sound like a choir of angels.
L'OCCOLIA!
L'OCCOLIA!
L'OCCOLIA!
L'OCCOLIA!
L'OCCOLIA!
L'OCCOLIA!
L'OCCOLIA!
Right Louis?
Sounds like that, doesn't it Louis?
This is what from a thousand light years away the Vela Pulsar sounds like right now.
This is it, listen to this.
Now I don't know about you but that blew me away, I'm thinking wow, this is incredible.
You're like well what does it mean?
I don't know, is that some kind of Morse code for something or what does all that mean?
I don't know what it means but I don't want to go too crazy here but maybe the Vela Pulsar
got wind somehow innately of Psalm 148 verse 3 and says praise him sun and moon and all
you shining stars, we're a shining star, we should praise him.
Well how are we going to praise him?
I know, let's oscillate 11 times a second on our axis and see if we can send a radio
signal into the universe that would join in the symphony of God's praise from all creation.
Yeah, yep, that's exactly what happened Louis.
A neutron star was just sitting there with nothing to do after the star it came from
exploded and collapsed and it thought, because it has a brain after all, it thought, according
to a psalm I heard on a distant planet, I'm supposed to be singing praises to some deity.
With me so far?
Now although this neutron star had a brain and was very smart, it didn't have lungs
or a larynx or a mouth, come on that would be silly, so through sheer willpower it made
itself start spinning, just like a mountain can't, because it knew that by spinning 11
times a second it would eject x-rays and gamma rays that would make beautiful music, or at
least the sound of a jackhammer.
I don't want to go too crazy here.
No, of course not Louis, I'm glad you've kept this real and haven't ventured into the world
of lunatic fantasy.
And it's fascinating to learn that choirs like this one are wasting their time because
lovely as these melodic harmonies sound to our ears, God would be just as happy with
this.
However, there are a few things that make this intelligent pulsar idea kind of implausible
anyway.
When I say a few, I actually mean about 3520, but I'll save us both time and give you one.
The first thing that defeats this idea that a pulsar is singing from a hymn sheet is the
first law of the movie Alien.
In space, no one can hear you scream.
That's not just a clever tagline, it's a fact of physics.
Sound needs a medium in which to propagate, because sound waves are compression waves,
they have to compress something.
So for example here's the Mormon Tabernacle Choir singing How Great Thou Art at normal
atmospheric pressure.
Now we've sealed the temple around them to make it airtight, so watch what happens as
we suck the air out and replicate the vacuum of space.
And no, the choir would not explode as they do in sci-fi movies, but just before they
pass out and die of asphyxiation, notice how their singing becomes inaudible as less air
becomes available to propagate the sound waves.
So this pulsar isn't singing the praises of our Lord, even if you went right up to it,
all you'd hear is this.
What you're playing to your impressionable audience, Louis, are just computer-generated
sound waves following the pattern of electromagnetic emissions.
And just one other thing I guess I ought to comment on, I didn't realise that not only
do stars have a brain, but they can exercise free will as well.
They can decide whether to praise God or not praise God, and I guess that means they can
decide whether they want to be religious, maybe there are atheist stars.
And if they don't have free will, because according to the Bible only humans have that,
then the only alternative is that God deliberately designed these neutron stars to eject charged
particles and sing his praises.
If so, what an egotistical, self-deluding deity he is.
He's a bit like a teenage girl singing in front of a mirror, who plays her own fake
tape of audience applause every time she finishes a performance.
Louis, doesn't your God have better things to do with his time?
