Hello everyone, this is just another Q&A video because I hit a hundred thousand subscribers here on YouTube recently
Which is fairly neat. I like it when we hit these milestones
Generally because I like making these Q&A videos to be honest
So thank you to everyone who's subscribed and supported the channel. Here's to... what's the next big
milestone after this?
Here's to 50 million subscribers, how about that? And let's just get right into it, okay
Hi Sean, have you ever tried vanilla Coke?
Yes, I have
Starting with that question. I didn't do any editing on the order of these questions
they're just how I pasted them into the text document here, so
Yes, I have tried vanilla Coke
I'm not going to tell you what I thought of vanilla Coke because that wasn't part of the question
So okay on to the next one
When are we getting our annual CinemaSins video for 2018? Oh, man, those things
Do I really have to do another one of those? I don't... I don't want to. I hate them
It'd involve watching another year's worth of CinemaSins videos. I don't know. People seem to like them though
Possibly
Around December, I'd say around the end of the year if it happens, which right now it probably won't
What thing have you done so far that you're most proud of?
I'll assume you just mean on YouTube here, and it's the Charlottesville video
I think that's the one I spent the most time on and that I think came out the best to be honest
So yeah that one
What's the ideal length for audio takes or do you try to get it all over with in one go?
Well, I answered this in another video, but I tend to record all of my audio in a single go
Just because I'm not very good at it, and if I recorded it at different times, it would sound different
I've never been able to crack that problem really even in an identical audio setup my audio seems to sound different
So I just do it all in one go so there's no
Noticeable cuts so now I try to get the script completely 100% finished before I start
Recording it. Can you hear those banging upstairs? I'm not gonna cut that out today
Yeah, there's another one
It's it's that all the time so on my like regular videos where I don't want to have just random knocks in the background
I have to try and record sentences in between those knocks
It's it's hellish, and they seem to increase when I start recording as well
I think my upstairs neighbors don't like me very much and wait for me to start recording videos, and there's another one
Just start throwing rocks around or something
Seeing as you seem to like Star Wars. What are your thoughts on the prequel trilogy?
Do you like them hate them or have mixed feelings about them? I guess I'd fall under the mixed category here
I don't think they're particularly good movies however. They're not as bad as the internet
Makes out and
some of the things in there are quite interesting like I
I
don't know. I'm one of those people who's like I
I'm happier that the prequels exist than
Sort of free boring movies that just tried to copy the success of the original trilogy by making something like identical
But without the impact you know so I'm happy yeah, I'm happy the prequels exist
And I like the Gungans. I think the Gungans are cool, and I like the podrace as well
I think the podrace is a genuinely good
action scene
So yeah
Sue me
How do you deal with parasocial relationships and then in brackets in which you are not the persona?
So I guess this is me being a fan of someone else then I think you just need to respect
Boundaries really and keep a few things in mind like I have
Creators on YouTube. I really like I have twitch streamers. I really like
but you have to be aware constantly that what you're seeing is just a
Public face really and it's a little bit more of a blurred line than in
Traditional like broadcast television obviously because it's there's no PR people or handlers or editors in between you and them when
They're just like streaming live on Twitch
but you're still seeing a
persona and
Not always the real person
This question reminded me of that video by Shannon Strachey about parasocial relationships
Which I believe she's and making a follow-up to so I'll link that in the description and you should go check that out
I say I believe she's making a follow-up to I know she is she asked me to record a voice climb for it
So I'll be in that one as well
How do you manage to stay so calm and maintain hope when everything seems so grim?
Well, this is a loaded question, isn't it? I don't
Often, you know, actually this ties into the previous question a little which is odd because I didn't intend for it to at all
but yeah, what you're seeing there is
An act if I make a response video the first time I watch through the video
I'm pausing every 10 seconds and swearing and
Furiously scribbling notes and I'm incredibly angry about it all
And then over the creation process by the time it comes out the other side in in the actual
Video that goes up on my channel. It's not that I'm suddenly not angry about racism or
Whatever else I'm talking about
It's that I've decided that that is the best way to present my argument
so it's a
Fiction basically, I'm more often a very angry and moody person to be honest
Next question. Why are anti-feminist anti SJW beliefs so popular? I got asked this a few times in
various forms and
Mainly it's because they're easy. It's very simple to look at sort of complicated
social political economic problems and then just
Blame all of that on a group of other people who are bad
It's sort of a shortcut into feeling superior to other people and all types of people do it
It's just lazy thinking basically
Next question. I really want to make video game reviews and political essays like you and hbomberguy, but I'm terrified. No one will like me
Well, that certainly hasn't stopped hbomberguy. So I'd say just go ahead
That's not very fair
I'd say if you want to do those things
Then you should don't let the fear of not being popular
Stop you
Because you won't be
You definitely won't be when you start out
I made videos for years as I've mentioned before with basically no audience at all
Oh, you know a single or double-digit audience for a very long time
before
like any of my
Videos broke a thousand views. It was like two years or something like that
And but it was still fun. It was still an interesting way to spend my time and I learned a lot doing that
That has helped me out now. So yeah, go ahead. Give it a go
Next question. What are your predictions for the future of the Democrats? Will they move to the left?
Will they be surpassed by a more left-wing party? Will they continue to capitulate to Republicans and be absolutely useless?
That's from Cameron there
Sort of a mix of those I think Democrats as in
The party membership and people who vote for the Democrats will probably move further left
I think the party establishment will continue to capitulate to Republicans and be absolutely useless
I mean the way they're going now, they are going to lose
The next presidential election like how they are right now they it's over already Trump is a two-term president
They have absolutely no chance in hell
That beaten Trump and without a significant shift in a policy here
It's best to think of the of the Democrats
Saying when I say the Democrats, I usually mean at the party establishment in terms of energy as in
They have no energy to do anything. That's why they've latched on to the
Russia thing so much because it doesn't require them to make any promises like they don't have to do anything
They all promise something that they'll fail to deliver on like they know
At least I hope they know that they could win by running on
Things like relief for student debt and universal health care and things like that
They must know that they could win if they did that
But they won't because then they'd have to do it
Or they think they'd have to do it
Anyway, they should learn from the Republicans that you don't have to actually do the things that you promised to do like
Democrats tense and waffling now, but whatever I'm gonna keep going at Democrats and the states tend to try to get everything sorted
Before they decide what they're going to do
Republicans just say what they're going to do and then worry about the
complications later
Like Trump ran on big wall Mexico pays for it
And now there's absolutely no way to do that or make it work
It's a complete waste of time and money and effort and it makes the country look bad and it wouldn't do anything
Even if you did it
But none of that matters
What matters is that he won the election
I feel like they're too addicted to polling which makes them very boring and
unexciting like if you look at universal health care very divisive policy in the United States anyway, not
insensible countries
Yeah, universal health care you get people coming out very strongly in favor of it very strongly against it and the Democrats don't like that
They like things that everyone sort of agrees with
so if you poll for universal health care you get 50-50 split of people being angry or happy about it and
But if you poll for better health care
It turns out everyone likes better health care everyone supports better health care. So they run on that instead
They say oh we're going to work to make health care better for everyone
You're like, but how?
What are you actually going to do like we're going to make it really good
Non specifically that's how you end up with like just like middle-of-the-road rubbish like Obamacare and get it
It's easy to call it that as like someone from a different country where you know
It hasn't saved my life or whatever
But even accounting for all the people who Obamacare has helped it is a rubbish system
It's awful and you just need full universal health coverage in the states
That's it should be the only acceptable position
I mean if I lived in the states, I'd encourage people not to support any Democrat who didn't come out in favor of it
But again, I get that that's very easy for me to say, you know, not living with the consequences of all the other actions
What was the question here? Even I don't know the Democrats are just rubbish as in the party establishment
There's plenty of local-level Democrats who are brilliant and working really hard and doing everything, right?
But it feels like if they want to get anything done anytime soon
They're just gonna have to go through the party leadership somehow. I don't know how they are gonna do that
but that should be on the agenda of
More left-leaning Democrats now. It's okay. How do we get these people out of the party? How do we go around them?
Next question, do you know how artists eventually begin to regret old works that they made?
Does that happen to you and how long does it take to kick in if it does?
about
45 seconds usually
Yes, I've got old videos I've taken down because I'm not happy with them anymore
Around the time I started getting popular on YouTube was when I started making
videos about
anti-feminists and alt-right figures and such
And when I set about doing that it wasn't
for some social justice cause particularly it wasn't because I was worried about the reach or
Corrupting influence of these people or anything and it was because I thought that they were really pompous and it would be funny to annoy them
So the way I went about making videos was totally different to how I do it now
Like now I am actually concerned about those things and I actually do make videos about ideas and arguments
Or at least I hope I do
But back then I was just trying to piss people off really
So I've been taking those videos offline now because I'm not happy with them and it's not something
I like being out there and representing me
So yes, basically I tend to go off things that I make
Next question. Is there any possible way for you to make more videos faster?
Yes, I could do that, but I haven't been
for a few reasons
One thing is I've been thinking of changing maybe to monthly payments on a patreon
Because some ideas I have are like I could make a video about that
But there isn't really enough in it to justify me spending the time
Making it if I'm not gonna feel comfortable charging for it
and with a like a lighter video if I made something like 10 minutes or something or
Anything that was substantially either shorter or like more off-the-cuff
I
Wouldn't feel comfortable charging for that charging an audience for that who were used to
You know a different sort of thing so I just tend not to do those ideas instead
I'm like, well, I can't really justify the time investment if I'm not gonna get paid for it, but
So it just ends up not being made
but if I went to monthly
Then I could sort of I'd feel more loose about what I could make then
So that's something I'm gonna be thinking about in the next few months. If I did that it would probably be
around
Christmas this year I
Think I might go over to monthly. I'm not sure I'll think about it
And do you have any plans to change your format and introduce more visuals?
Not really. I wanted to initially but
Similar to the last question, you know, this seems to be fairly popular what I'm doing right now
A lot of people have messaged me to say they treat them sort of as podcasts and I've started writing them
More and more such that they make sense without the visuals as well
I still put visuals in because I think they enhance it
Make things clearer and such and you have to refer to a visual every now and then in the script
but I try to do as much of it as
Understandable just by listening to the audio
So I don't have any plans to change the format right now if I changed formats at all, it would be
On completely new content that wasn't related to what I was currently doing
So my sort of monthly videos will continue to be the same sort of thing
For the foreseeable future anyway
Next question. Why are so many right-wingers into Warhammer? Well, because it's a bunch of
Militaristic fascist states just clashing into each other constantly
And they love all that shit
Basically, I think Warhammer doesn't have
Like everything's horrible in Warhammer, there's no faction you can point to and say they're the good guys
You know, they're the people who are trying to get it done. Well
Like everyone is just a different flavor of horrible
So there's no
sort of
Space within the universe to sort of openly criticize these like horrible societies
Next question. Why aren't conservatives funny?
And it's interesting this
It's all relative. Of course. I mean lots of people do think
Conservatives are funny for whatever reason
but with
Comedy you need both the person that like
Attempting to be funny and you need the audience as well. Like you need to consider their
Reaction and their understanding and what they're bringing to it
No one can be funny in a vacuum without an audience really
Playing to conservative audiences you have much less material and fewer places you can go
because if you you know, very loose characterizations of liberal and conservative thought
conservatives favor
tradition things staying the same
They don't like change. They like everyone being one way one type of thing
And that just sort of naturally restricts your available material because you can't go outside that
relatively narrow world view whereas
On the left you have a lot more spaces you can go basically also and again
This is just my opinion comedy works best when you're punching up
And conservatives really don't like punching up at all
Next question, how's brexit treating you? Well, it's an absolute disaster, isn't it?
I don't think there's anyone who thinks it's going well
Yeah, it's terrible. It's I thought about stockpiling food the other day
imagine that
like in
the UK like
ostensibly a
first world developed wealthy nation
I'm
thinking about
Stockpiling food for an upcoming disaster next question. What do you think of Jeremy Corbyn?
I
Don't know yet
on the one hand I really like
Corbyn for but well, he's a left-winger, isn't he?
Which is great. It's excellent to have an actual leftist at the head of the Labour Party
Which should you know, you'd imagine it be a requirement
To be the head of the again ostensibly left-wing Labour Party, but it's not so it's very good that he's in there
I hope he is able to transform the party to be more in line with
Like its original intent than what Tony Blair and co turned it into
Now the reason I am unsure about Corbyn is I'm not sure what he's going to do with regards to
the whole brexit
disaster I
Was completely not on board with how labor were handling the whole brexit thing until fairly recently. I've come around on it, but
see
What I wanted them to do was to immediately come out guns blazing
Trying to shut it down offering a second referendum
Doing everything in their power to stop it
And seeing them just sit on the sidelines was a bit frustrating
But I've changed my mind now. I
feel like brexit is such a disaster and so terrible that
It sort of needs to land squarely on the Tories like that
It needs to be marked down in the history books as the Tories did this and it was a complete disaster. I
Feel like giving them an out
Like if Corbyn came out tomorrow and said we'll do a second referendum
One it would be very risky because a lot of Labour voters voted leave
Secondly the Tories would immediately pivot
from infighting and
destroying themselves and resigning
to
immediately blaming everything on labor
They would say I can't believe labor is
Disrupting these negotiations which were going so well
They it was perfect until labor came along and ruined it all and the very
Compliant media would swallow it completely. They would say labor are backstabbers
Hurting our country at this crucial point in the negotiations, which were going wonderfully
So now I'm sort of on board
With labor just sitting on their hands and saying well, you know get on with it
However, that's
Introduced like an element of uncertainty now, like I'm not sure what Corbyn would do if he was just handed power tomorrow
so it makes it kind of hard for me to throw my full like unqualified support behind him because
his
Attitude towards like this big crucial question about the future of our country is just sort of a question mark to me right now
So it remains to be seen basically, I hope he's as good as he could be
Next question. How has YouTube fame affected your opinion of yourself?
It hasn't really and I wouldn't I'm not YouTube famous am I I
Don't think so, I'm like one
600th of a PewDiePie like it's you know, it's all relative and
because I I
Don't often appear in videos or on camera like even when I'm streaming like it's a rare thing. I don't get recognized
So it's not really affected my opinion of myself all that much at least
I hope it hasn't it's hard to tell when these things are happening to you. Well
One thing I've noticed with a lot of the anti-feminist youtubers that get quite big they start thinking that they are
geniuses just because they have
Thousands of people telling them that they're geniuses all the time
So I always have to remind myself when anyone says oh, you're really good or whatever
I always challenge it in my head. I'm like dad. You don't know what you're talking about. I'm actually
Complete rubbish
Next question. Hey Shawn just for your 100k Q&A video who are some of your favorite YouTube channels?
Always looking for new folks to watch. Thanks. That's from Nick's fears there
Well one particular channel that I'd like to give a big shout out to is a Nick's fears
I don't know if you've heard of them question asker, but they make very good videos about movies
I'll put a link in the description. So everyone should head over there and subscribe
It's absolutely criminal that my channel is at 100k subscribers
Before Nick's fears as so go and correct that injustice, please everyone
as for other YouTube channels, I
mentioned
Shannon Strouchy on Strouchy movies earlier. I hope I'm pronouncing your surname. Okay there Shannon
Mainly you could just look at my subscription list on YouTube. I think that's available to be seen if it's not
It's not I think it is though
Besides all the other big leftist youtubers, which I imagine most people know, you know, if you watch me, you you know contrapoints
You know hbomberguy
Probably
Things that I just watch personally in my own time. I always feel weird giving a plug to
like I watch
Panon Coec 2012's Mario videos
The whole bunch but that's cuz I just find that really interesting and I wouldn't do other people like watching that stuff
I don't know. Well, they make very good videos about Mario 64
I
like novel 87s
Warcraft lore videos because I'm a big nerd and I actually care about the lore of world of warcraft
If you can believe it I am one of the four people I
think
None of who work at Blizzard who actually care about the law
So, yeah, just check my subscription list basically if it's available if not, I
Should do like I'll do like a Twitter thread of a bunch of channels. I think are really good
Remind me to do that if I don't do that like within a day of this video being posted
Someone just poked me on Twitter and I'll do it. I'm using my audience like you'd use Siri or something
Next question have you explored your gender identity much any interesting findings? Yes, and no
Yes, I thought about gender a lot I have
Trans pals, you know, I have non-binary pals
Gay pals and so on
So it's something I do I talk about and think about a fair amount but personally
I'm
Comfortable with how I'm seen to be yeah, which I've always considered myself
Quite lucky. What should I say that? I don't know. I feel bad. I feel like it's giving into a world that
Sort of
oppresses
Minorities to say oh, I'm glad I'm not a minority because I don't I wouldn't want to deal with the like oppression and assholes
Making me feel bad all the time. I guess I need to qualify that I
Feel glad I'm not because I wouldn't want to deal with the discrimination and not because I think there's anything
You know inherently bad about identifying as any of those things. There we go. I thought I figured that out live
There we go live for process everyone
Next question you've mentioned before people who are a bit overbearing in your fan base who demand you denounce
They saw that person or speak on a certain issue
Is there any particular way you deal with that now if I'd edited these into a proper list? I would have put this earlier with the
With the
parasocial relationships one, but yes something I've struggled with is people
Seeing the brand
Instead of you know me as a person as in if I don't speak about one particular issue
That means I am deliberately avoiding it instead of you know I was at Tesco and
Didn't see it
You know I don't think people literally think I'm like a corporation or something with you know
handlers and
secretary and things and I'm aware of everything but I
Feel like they sort of carry that mindset over like once you reach a certain size on the internet
people start treating you like that anyway, and
You know I can have a bad day and not want to get into a big internet argument about something I
remember a point where
Some Twitter personality had done something very bad that I disagreed with
And people were asking me to call them out about it
But just that particular day. I was feeling very down and
About something in my personal life a family issue and didn't really feel like getting into a big
argument
with
someone on Twitter you know and
That can suck. It's like you don't get days off
From it and in a sense you know usually I'm happy to try and use my audience for productive things like that, but it's
It doesn't feel like it's a choice a lot of the time it feels like
You have to do that or you just lose some people forever like I've a lot of people on the left
Particularly people in minority groups like so used to being betrayed
Quotes well, I guess not air quotes, maybe
The semi quotes
By like online figures and stuff that you only really get one chance with a lot of people
So if you don't speak on this or that issue you're cancelled forever of course
so the way I deal with that is to just assume that
If it wasn't this thing it would be another thing fairly soon
You can't keep everyone on board forever
You're always gonna have some people who disagree with the way you do things
So I just rationalize it like that. You know people are free to
Decide they don't like me
Yeah
Next question what you use to organize or plan video research is it just a text document or what?
Usually I just use a text document occasionally if I have anything that I'd like anyone else to check out for me I use
Like a Google Drive to just upload it
When I made the Charlottesville video I had to print out a whole bunch of maps
And notes to like keep it all organized. So
my
Room looked a bit like
Seen from the wire or something, you know
A whole bunch of maps with notes and little sticky notes stuck all over them. That was fun
You know, I hope I never have to make another video about that topic
But I liked the process of actually putting the video together
Next question. How is your vegetarian diet going? It was going well until a couple of days ago
Where I've I've temporarily put it on hold. I
Need to take another run at it in a little while. I
decided to go vegetarian a few months ago and
Did so successfully I didn't eat any meat for like months apart from my cheese at once with a fish
Sounds weird. I
Never got cravings for meat at all
Even though it was like mainly what I ate until then except for fish
I got fish cravings and I don't even particularly like fish very much. So that was
That was interesting, but I didn't put enough preparation into thinking about how to go vegetarian. So instead of
Coming up with vegetarian meals and stuff to fill in for the meat. I was cutting out
I just ate more of the non meat things that I like that were in my diet, which isn't good for you. Really? So
I've
Been feeling not too great on the old vegetarian diet
And so I've had to put a pin in it for now and my I'm eating meat again
But my goal is to go vegetarian and stick with it. So I'm going to
spend a little while
experimenting with different food and trying to come up with it like a
menu of foods that I can eat from that sort of
ensures that I
Like actually
nutritionally get everything that I need I'm gonna try and make it a
process instead of just like a
Immediate thing, you know next question. Why is it so hot? I'm dying. I feel my melted brain leaking out my ears and
Me too. I mean especially when I mean I'm recording audio right now, so I can't have my fan on because it sounds like this
And I can't have the window open because then you can hear everything that's happening outside
So I'm sitting in a hot little room being really hot
It's the worst I hate heat waves where is just cold all year round I want I'm thinking about moving
Probably next year. I'm gonna move
Somewhere else and a big part of me deciding where to move is
Somewhere where it's colder than it is here because I really like the cold. I
Don't like heat at all. It makes me feel terrible and it's just hot all the time
Now this it was a heat wave a while ago and now it's just like oh, this is just the weather in the country now
It's terrible and it's hot everywhere else. There's a heat wave in Japan right now. There's some horrible
fire and grease
God the world's burning
It's this dreadful
Next question. How do you go about refuting people who make their arguments by simply pointing out a true fact while obviously
insinuating some bad political opinion with the fact so folks who are very coy about their true beliefs and sort of
Talk around it. I suppose
I just fill in the gaps that they won't for instance
you know you get some people who are
racist and who
Hate black people and think black people are genetically inferior and they want to spread that message
But they know they can't say that upfront because they'll just look like a racist and they'll get banned off whatever platform
they're using so what they do is just
List off all the other reasons why black people might not do as well economically or whatever and
Then dismiss them they have a list of reasons
It could be and they just cross out everything except for the genetic argument
And then just leave it hanging there and trust the audience to make the leap for themselves
So what I do is just step in and force it to go to that position by
Claiming that is what they believe
deliberately heavy air quotes
misrepresenting their position
Because that forces them to
Clarify by saying they do or do not believe and then you've sort of neutered the tactic there because you've taken it to a place
Where they didn't want to go because they were deliberately avoiding it
It's something I've done in videos before if someone's being very coy about what they actually believe
I just pick a position for them and say that's what they believe because then it makes them say I don't believe that
It's something I've had success with
For instance with Stefan Molyneux like I have previously claimed Stefan Molyneux thinks women are inferior
Which he does, but he'd never admit to so I just like make the claim for him, and then that splits his audience
I've posted comments before that are like
One Stefan Molyneux fan being like he's never said he hates women that would be a ludicrous thing to say you're
Misrepresenting him and then the next comment is like he's right to hate women. They're weak and inferior. You know
Next question I noticed that sometimes in your response videos you play a lot of clips from the source and other times like in recent
Videos you don't is it about the time it takes to make a video editing wise or is it to do with the content?
You'd be quoting from them
Do you ever have misgivings about including clips of people saying slurs and hateful things and the impact it might have on your audience?
Yes, this is something I think about quite a lot, and I've definitely been experimenting more with
Just not including clips
Of other people talking when it's not
actually necessary and just summarizing their arguments for them and trusting my audience to
Go and view the original video if they doubt me there
Partially because I don't like spreading that content around even if I'm responding to it
You know like I don't like making people listen to black pigeon speaks for instance
so I've been
It's not anything to do with the video editing time because it's no time at all really to just drop clips
It probably takes more time to write and record me summarizing their arguments than to just put their clips in
But it's something I've been moving away from I used to get a lot comments like oh
I struggle to watch Sean's videos because he puts in long clips of like Molyneux or whoever
So yeah, I'm attempting to do it without for now
But who knows I might change my mind later
Next question your frog riddle argument relies on the assumption that the rate at which male frogs croak is
independent of the sexes of the other frogs as well as other factors
Since croaking is a social act closely tied to mating behavior
This assumption is dubious and either way cannot be a third from the information present in the riddle
There's no valid basis to assume that two male frogs are twice as likely to croak as one male frog
Rendering your argument invalid to summarize this as a question
Do you concede that the correct answer to the frog riddle given only the information presented therein is two thirds?
This again, right
No, I don't agree. I
Think that if we start making assumptions about the croaking such as it's tied to mating behavior
Then the croaking would actually increase if it was a male-female pair
It would be more likely to occur than if it were two males
Because they wouldn't be croaking at each other. It wouldn't be two-thirds
It would actually be some other value
The problem here is that if you make the assumption that two male frogs are not
More likely than one male frog to make a croak over a given period
Then you have to explain why that is
And
The answer will invariably be something that makes the outcome of the riddle not be a fixed value
Anymore because it's information that we don't have like saying something like, you know frogs croak
when they're mating for instance
or
Saying two male frogs won't croak when they're in close proximity, which you know, maybe that's true
So two male frogs will be less likely to croak than one male frog
But that makes it the answer to the riddle not be two-thirds, doesn't it?
because it's if one you hear one frog croak, then you know that the other one is a female if
You say that two male frogs will croak around other male frogs
But not twice as likely then you have to account for why the fact that only one would croak and there just isn't the information
In the riddle, basically, it's not a good riddle
It's explained poorly. I was right. The riddle was wrong
You're all gonna have to wait for the inevitable hbomberguy video about the frog riddle that he's been threatening to make for a while
What's your favorite biscuit?
I'm partial to some ginger nuts actually
Next question. What's your computer setup CPU GPU etc. Can you hear that plane? I live right next to the airport. It's terrible
I have a 1080 TI an i7 8700 K 16 gigs of RAM
and a bunch of solid-state hard drives
Which is neat. I have a fairly good computer on the whole. I need it for streaming to be honest streaming's
Difficult it really taxes everything. I
Feel like there needs to be some sort of nah, they wouldn't make it good
I was thinking they should sell like they I don't know who they are either
They should sell like a streaming rig
specifically designed to stream games
instead of sort of forcing
You know one CPU to do the rendering of the game and the streaming of the game at the same time
the next question is who is the best fictional detective and
My question is why is this a question because it's obviously Columbo
Columbo is by far and away the best fictional detective. He's brilliant
The next question is are you planning on doing more videos like the problem with privatizing the railways?
Yes, I am I have a couple more of those plans and I said at the start of the year that I'd like to make more
videos like that
But things just keep getting in the way
They take quite a long time to research those ones
I still I'm going to make those videos, but it's just when I get around to them. Basically. I've got one about
Schools in the works and then one about health. That's
That's just like a skeleton plan for now, but the school one is pretty far along
I could do that like next month really if I wanted to maybe I will I don't know
I've learned not to make predictions about when my videos are gonna come out anymore
because invariably something gets in the way or I change my mind like a month later or
some terrible
Technical problem happens that pushes the release date back
Never listen to me if I say a video is going to be out by a particular date
It almost certainly won't be next question
I want to know what is your opinion about people of the upper class who support the ideas of the left?
I ask because I'm from the upper class. My parents have given me many opportunities in life
Which does not mean that I believe these opportunities were deserved and I feel conflicted about my support for the abolishment of inheritance
Because even if I'm completely in favor of it if my inheritance disappeared, I don't know what I'd do
On the other hand, I think that if there was a certainty that I would not die of hunger or cold in the future
I would not mind at all what happens to my parents money
Yes, well you nailed it at the end there
I think this is an example of a situation in which when we say we support something we need to clarify our
Sort of broader political goals as well because if you say I support
Abolishing inheritance and then nothing else a lot of people are gonna be very put off by that obviously
But if it didn't matter if inheritance was abolished because no one would ever
Want for a place to stay or food or heating or such?
Then people would be a lot more on board with it for a lot of these sorts of issues
It's better to explain your full world view and how your opinion on the particular issue fits into it
Rather than just saying, you know, I support abolishing inheritance and that's it similarly with
Saying you want to abolish private property. I mean if you just say that in isolation a lot of people assume
You mean you want to come to their house and steal their car and their pets and things like that
Which obviously isn't how it works. So I guess what I'm saying is we should push for the full package really
Hey Sean, this is a pretty stupid question, but I plan to move to the UK at some point in my life soon
Would you advise against it and you'll have any suggestions for a cheap but good place to live?
Wow, okay, I
would advise waiting for now and seeing how brexit turns out it's
Right now we're looking at the quotes hard brexit
Which means the whole country is going to explode
If you do if you have to move here for whatever horrible reason I would look at places in
maybe
Wales or Scotland and not England and if you do have to live in England
I would probably suggest somewhere outside of London
Just because it's so expensive there, you know
Either way best of luck to you. You're gonna need it
Next question. Do you tend to get more enjoyment from multiplayer?
systems driven games where you spend many hours perfecting your play or from games that take you through a story or adventure once and then
You're done with it
Well, I'm very boring here and don't really have a preference. I
Like plenty of games that fall into both of those categories
And what I think makes the game good or bad in this regard is if it knows exactly what it is and
Like the worst of both worlds here is a game that should be a short story driven thing
but
unnecessarily tacks on a bunch of like
customization level up
grindy nonsense
In order to slow the whole game down and just pad the runtime
So I can like either of these I just like them when they're well designed
For what they are. So I guess what I'm saying is is I like good video games and not bad ones
That's my brave opinion for today. Next question. Is the voice you use in your videos your real voice?
Mostly I
Guess I don't put on an accent or anything
But in most of my videos I'm reading from my prepared script I'm not in this one
which is why I'm umming and ahhing and
Speaking slower than you might be used to hearing me. But mostly yeah, I sound like this IRL I suppose
next question who is Jen and
I still get asked this quite a lot. I took Jen's name off the YouTube channel and everything
I still get asked who Jen is like all the time and it's so easy to find out but people keep asking me it
So actually I'm gonna throw this one over to Jen. Hello. I'm Jen
I am NOT a body pillow or a hand. I am Sean's friend
I am NOT in the YouTube videos anymore except for this one because nobody believes I am real
If you like me, you should watch our regular live streams on our twitch channel
Twitch.tv slash Sean and Jen, okay
So there we go. That was Jen why she chose to read that out. Like I forced her to at gunpoint
I don't know. So thanks for that Jen
Yeah, okay folks. That's all for me today. Thanks a lot as always for watching and subscribing all
100,000 of you that is rather scary, isn't it?
Yes
100,000 people
Wow, let's get to a million
Then then I'll really be scared when we get to a million Wow ten times
So it took me like a couple years to get here
So it's gonna take me a couple of decades to get to a million
Assuming like steady growth like it has been going Wow
So I'll be like 50
Let's see if I can get to a million subscribers before I'm 50
Will I still be doing this when I'm 50 I I don't know if I'm happy about that or not actually I
Mean, I like doing it, but am I gonna like doing this when I'm 50?
This is the conversations I have with myself off microphone. Okay
Thanks a lot folks. I'll see you next time
