There weren't enough white people in the new Star Wars. I thought this opinion would be
shared by my fellow critics, but unfortunately, thanks to political correctness, censorship,
leftist midichlorians, most mainstream critics seem to only talk about the directing, the
editing, the sound, the cinematography, the symbolism, and the acting. None of the important
stuff. There are sequences in it in which the landscapes were, as you said, beautiful.
They were genuinely breathtaking. They reminded you of that sense of, you know, interplanetary
awe. But I wonder what the internet thought of Star Wars colon The Force Awakens. Okay,
for this video, I was going to have a segment where I watch Anita Sarkeesian's review of
The Force Awakens with my camera on and react to it in real time, but once I'd started,
I found there really wasn't anything to react to. She's gotten really good at hiding the
fact she's secretly two Hitlers behind layers of straightforward, understandable criticism
for Monster. It must take a lot of skill and talent to be constantly outraged at her opinions
for money. I couldn't even muster the anger to Photoshop her company logo into fascist
propaganda. In the time it takes you to make one of those propaganda posters, you could
have done all kinds of far more interesting things. You could have written your own opinion
in a way that is actually productive and communicates new ideas and maybe even convinces
someone to change their mind and see things your way. You know, you could have watched
a Star Wars film, or you could do something even better. You could go on eBay and buy
Star Wars PEZ dispensers. You're going to see these in a joke in the video later on.
It's going to be great. You see? And that's what being productive is all about. PEZ dispenser
would you like? I'm doing a Yoda thing because he's Yoda. There isn't a PEZ in this one,
so I've fucked up this take. If you want some really badass opinions, you're going to have
to delve deep with me into the world of alt-right wing crazy people. I would call it the dark
side, but they're all white. I wonder what the best way to find incredibly advanced intelligent
opinions about Star Wars is. Maybe I should try a pun like the farce awakens? Rocking
mystery AND Thunderf00t used that pun? Fucking bingo! Returning truth teller, rocking MRA.
Sorry, rocking Mr. E. Mystery? Mr. E has something to say about the Star Wars films. Let's watch.
SJWs ruined Star Wars. This is going to be one fucking badass Star Wars review, let me
tell you. I've always been very fond of Star Wars. I strongly suspected that something
wasn't right, since mainstream critics are generally leftists pushing an agenda. With
this video, I'm going to explain how and why everything about The Force Awakens was completely
shaped around a leftist social justice warrior agenda. Everything? Oh man, he's going to
talk about the direction of the film or the sound design or the cinematography or the
editing or the symbolism. I was already expecting straight white males to take a back seat,
but this acceptance was completely inadequate for the myriad of problems with the movie.
Star Wars has always been most loved by young white males, but like comics and everything
else white males enjoy, they now have to share or give up their culture. They have to share
my comics with girls. Women have a rich history in cinema, with roles like Ripley in Ridley
Scott Aliens, Catwoman in Tim Burton's Batman or Princess Leia in George Lucas' Star Wars.
Sci-fi and fantasy should adhere to rules set by the storyteller. The Force Awakens
not only fails to do this, but even sacrifices old rules to pander to SJW ideology.
He spends a good long time holding on this picture of Rey. I like to think she's reacting
to what he's saying.
SJWs reacted to Avengers Age of Ultron, trolling, harassing and bullying Joss Whedon on Twitter.
Though Whedon denies he left Twitter for this reason...
In this part she's probably thinking, why is he talking about Joss Whedon being harassed
on Twitter by idiots? I thought this video was about Star Wars. Unsubscribed.
Luke took three movies to grow as a character, and throughout the original trilogy Luke was
saved and helped at multiple points.
She's not exactly like Luke Skywalker. No, she's not like the old ones. I guarantee you
right now at some point he's going to complain that it's a rehash of A New Hope, right?
The second protagonist of the film, Finn, was also a product of SJW ideology. It's clear
his primary role was to fill diversity quotas. Finn was a poor substitute for previous black
roles, Mace Windu and Lando Calrissian, while John Boyega is the effeminate male actor.
So one black actor was just to fill a quota, but the other two were what, just normal black
people?
Finn was a character that made no sense. He had no Jedi training that could fight with
a lightsaber.
Jedi training? It's a stick! It's a glowing stick! Hayden Christensen can swing that stick
like a ballerina, and he's the clumsiest person in the world! Han Solo uses it at one point.
Man, it's weird how you forgot about the scene where Han Solo saves Luke's life. You'd think
a fan would remember that sort of thing.
I've always been very fond of Star Wars.
By the way, word of advice, if you're reading from a script, don't wave your head around
as you stare at it like that for emphasis, because people can then tell that you're just
reading from a script, and it kind of defeats the whole purpose of orating to a person.
When I talk to a human being, I look at them. I don't go, let me read from my pre-prepared
notes here to you, Dad. I would like you to give me back my phone.
If we look past Rey and Finn, The Force Awakens was still a tragic affair. The plot was such
a rehash of A New Hope that this could not...
I fucking called it!
In this video, I've only scratched the surface of...
I agree, it's been like eight and a half minutes, and you've not even really talked about the
Maybe you should do a redo. Oh, I guess I'm watching it, so I didn't. Why am I giving the screen advice?
That's a great font. That'll just scare leftists right off.
By the way, when you're making a logo, try not to incorporate three different fonts at once.
It's not good on the eyes. You'll notice that the Star Wars logo is clean, crisp, and consistent.
It doesn't look like this. When you completely avoid talking about the audio and visual aspects
of a medium that's mostly audio and visual, in fact, it's all of it, you might be doing
analysis wrong. Apparently, it's more of a controversial box-ticking move now to have
a black main character than it was 30 years ago, and that's messed up.
It's been a couple of years since Rocking Mystery's video about cultural Marxists, so
Maybe he's gotten a bit better at having a real discussion with people.
I just scrolled down. No. No, he doesn't.
You're cries of wolf. Cries of wolf.
Rocking Mystery, do you have your pills this week?
Well, Rocking Mystery's half right. I'm done with someone's hateful accusations. Goodbye.
Next time on whatever this series is called. Note to self, think of a name.
Wait, am I supposed to read this part out loud?
Listen up, old white man. J.J. Abrams hates you. He relishes the thought of your extinction.
Wow, they cast a black woman to play Hermione in a Harry Potter play.
My country is full of crime thanks to the love of diversity.
The Little White Cockball.
The Little White Cockball.
