Let me...
TELL YOU ABOUT VIDEO GAME FEMINISM!
HAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHA
AH-
hooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo conjugate
I know what you're all thinking
How could it possibly cost $15,000 a month to make a documentary about a lady in a flannel shirt?
I mean look at the great production value in this short film, written by David Sorrene
Nah man, you gotta get the hell out of here
I can't hear them, are they talking about the wind?
It's really windy here!
Lust and the Time of Heartache had great production values, and it only cost $10,000 to make!
We will strive to leave all political baggage at the door and simply report the truth as we fi-
I have decided that it is best for me, and best for the project, that I terminate my working relationship with David Sorrene
It is my right, and my responsibility, to terminate a director if I feel that they are not right for the project
What?
Firing David Sorrene as director?
But what could David possibly have done to deserve such a thing?
It's so unexpected that someone wouldn't want to get along with someone who says things like this!
You're a nigger
And you know you're a nigger
And you hate yourself
But instead of looking in the mirror, you blame Whitey
But wait! The plot thickens!
Davis recently put up an article of his own, called Jordan Owen Has Split the Sarkeesian Effect
Or, its original title, which was hastily edited, Jordan Owen Has Absconded with the Budget from the Sarkeesian Effect
At least, that's what it seems like, given that the article's URL reads
Jordan Owen Absconed Budget Sarkeesian Effect?
What?
Can you really not spell the name of the person you're criticizing?
Oh my god!
This documentary's gonna be amazing!
In the article, Lorini claims the problem started because Jordan Owen doesn't know how to relate to women
What a shocking revelation!
I would never have noticed Jordan Owen has a problem with women!
And I'll tell you right now, my favorite dancer at my favorite club is Molly at Tattletales
Go look her up and you'll find out why
And when a man who says stuff like,
Women, in our culture, have become the most decadent sluts since the fall of Rome
thinks you're bad with women, you know there's a problem
Orini also did the totally adult thing and put the skyplogs of the entire breakup online for all to see
With friends like these, who needs Anita Sarkeesian?
But to make matters worse, everyone's favorite contributor,
Davis Orini's super important toy skull he wants to make sure you know he has because he moves it between shots,
isn't in any of his later videos
Where's MacArthur gone?
And yes, that's its name, he named it
He gave his toy skull a name, like, like a person
He fucking names his skulls, what the fuck is wrong with this guy?
Could it be that he caved in to the degenerates who thought it made him look a little silly?
No, of course not!
He merely substituted it for a different prop, one that far better establishes what sort of person Orini is
A book on screenwriting 101!
What you need is a struggle
An enemy to overcome
It's pain that defines the masculine
It's pain that makes us who we are
Embrace it
Thanks, Rob Tobin!
Time to fix myself a rye whiskey and head out to my car I bought with the Patreon money to record a new video
Drinking liquor in a car has never been a bad idea, right guys?
But don't worry about Davis getting in a car accident though, folks, he's got it under control
He never actually drinks more than a thimble full of the stuff in most of his videos and just sort of pretends to drink it
The important thing is making people think you're cool, even if you have to dress like a pirate to do it
And let's not forget the Jews
Lord have mercy, let's not forget the Jews
Get it together, guys!
I mean, even Mundane Matt thinks you should do it
And he's a genius, wait
Is that his logo?
Is...
What is it with these people and skulls?
Are we the baddies?
I have not made these white ashtrays
Don't worry though, I'm sure at some point in the near future they'll realize how shitty and needlessly argumentative this makes them and their project look
And they'll pretend to be friends again to try and save face
No way, that already happened!
Owen Arrini Productions is back in business
Oh my god, Sony Vegas editing, it's so amazing
Reunite!
Oh, it's gone
It's okay, we're all friends again, honest
Can you please all un-lose all respect you ever had for this project, please?
Thank you very much
We're in good company with this
Look up the production of the...
I believe the first Godfather movie
So we're not alone
I think I'm having a heart attack, seriously
My heart hurts
I can't take this
He's comparing himself to Francis Ford fucking Coppola
The apocalypse is now for me
My heart is killing me
Oh Jesus Christ
Hey Jordan, remember that time I said
I hope Owen realizes that he's hitting rock bottom
That he can't continue to go on like this
And that he makes amends and starts working on becoming a kinder
More considerate and more responsible person
Well I was just kidding, everything's fine
Remember those times I directly compared you to Elliot fucking Roger?
Go watch Jordan's video on Roach
It's an hour long and it's very tedious
But you'll see these occasional glimpses of Elliot Roger
He wound up going completely Elliot Rogers as I was driving him to the airport
Well that was also just kidding
This project is fine
Well that's just great
Good to see the project's back on track
The train track to
Successfully defeating basic critical theory
Cheers guys
Seriously that's how much he drinks at a time
Go and check his videos
Fucking seriously
You know I'm not going to look at myself
I'm not going to improve myself
I'm not going to try and benefit my community
Or grow something good and positive
No
I'm going to blame others for my failings
And then
And then I'm going to go hurt those others
And say they deserved it
Because I'm a failure, they deserve to hurt
Jordan Owen and David Serrini have worked closely together for months
And even they can't decide if they like each other or not
Why should we trust what they have to say about a woman who
They haven't even met
Who at most has made a couple of hours of video footage
And whose name they can't even fucking spell
Guys
Guys
You look like twats
It's all Whitey's fault
It's all slavery
Slavery even though it ended 150 years ago
Is still holding my people down
Overall I'm just glad to see this little lover's tiff is over
I mean, seriously, what restraint
On the part of Jordan Owen to
Still be friends with someone and work with them on a documentary
After they directly compare you to Elliot Rodger
And make fun of you to the whole world and leak skype logs
And say you have horrible, horrible brain problems
And gaslight you
I mean
Comparing someone to Elliot Rodger is
The sort of shitty thing that I would do
In fact I did do it
Does that mean we'll be friends next?
I gotta get out of here
I'm going in first gear
I'm going really fucking slow
This isn't actually very good at all
Seriously
I'm not even listening to music
I'm gonna dub it in post
But it'll sound like I'm listening to music
And you'll think I'm cool, right?
I gotta get out of here
Fuck
