The universe is pretty big and very strange. Hundreds of billions of galaxies with sextillions
of stars and planets, and in the middle of it all, there's Earth with you and us. But as enormous as
the universe seems looking up, it seems to get even larger when you start looking down. You are
towering over worlds within worlds within worlds, each in plain sight and yet hidden from your
experience. Let's go on a journey. We'll start in a park about a thousand meters long, enough
for a 15-minute walk. Every time we click this magic button, we'll become a thousand times
smaller. Please slip into this magic science suit so you don't die and can still see. Ready? Let's
go. The miniature realm. You are the size of a grain of sand just two millimeters high,
standing on a blade of grass that seems as tall as an eight-story building to you. A square meter
of lawn is now a dense metropolitan area with 100,000 blades or two Manhattan's worth of grass
towers. From your new tiny perspective, the part that you could quickly stroll through before is
now the size of France. Crossing it would take at least a week. Human-sized humans loom over you,
four times taller than the Empire State Building, their steps falling from horizon to horizon. A bee
the size of a helicopter lands near you, making the ground shake as its hairy carapace vibrates
with each wing beat. You try to escape, but are barely able to move because the air is so gooey.
Before you click the button, air resistance was barely noticeable, but as you're now a thousand
times smaller, it's as if the air has become a thousand times denser. It feels like you're moving
through honey. Flying insects like bees use this to their advantage. Their wings are not made for
gliding, but like paddles that row through the air. Scaled up to human size, the bee would outrun a
Concorde jet, except it couldn't even take off because it would be too heavy for its wings.
The microscopic realm. You've entered the microscopic realm and are now less than two
micrometers tall, about the size of an E. coli bacteria. From your new tiny perspective,
the park you started in is now a million kilometers wide to you. If you walked nonstop,
it would take some 25 years to cross it. It's hard to grasp just how huge the microscopic
world is to its tiny inhabitants. The giant bee that was close a moment ago is now the size of
Mount Everest towering high into the sky, but alive, humming and vibrating. The air here feels
almost solid to you. On the human scale, it will be as viscous as lava, extremely hard to push
through. The blade of grass now expands so far you can't see its edges, stretching as wide as
Paris would to a regular-sized human. You see valleys that look like dried-up riverbeds,
dead patches like deserts, and giant craters left behind by voracious aphids. But if you look
closely, this is not terrain. These are rows of individual cells, each the size of a house,
with hard exteriors like glass shells. Every few cells there are huge openings called stomata,
like mouths sucking in air and blowing out oxygen. Suddenly, the gigantic bee begins to move. A
construct made of rigid pieces that slide against each other like a suit of armor. It takes off to
escape a drop of water the size of an asteroid that fell from another blade of grass and is now
rushing at you at breathtaking speeds. You brace for impact, but instead of feeling a strong punch,
you just get sucked in. You try to swim, but the water feels thick and sticky and holds onto your
limbs like glue. Air molecules are free spirits, while water molecules act more like social
creatures that group together whenever possible. They pull on each other and create a relatively
strong cohesive force that traps you. You can't help it, but you're still moving, tumbling in all
directions, helplessly dragged along by an invisible current. Floating in this miniature
lake are tens of thousands of microorganisms. They take on many forms, viruses the size of
tennis balls float around you aimlessly. Others, like Euglena oxyuric cells, pass you like freight
trains. But most look like oily jellyfish the size of a car, sporting long tentacles that act
like supercharged propellers. Despite the water holding onto them like glue, some move hundreds
of body lengths per second, equivalent to a person shoveling through mud at over 600 kilometers an
hour. However, bacteria weigh so little and water is so viscous that they basically have no inertia.
There is no gliding on this scale. The result is a weird jerky motion that's hard to keep track of.
Maybe we can learn more about this strange motion if we go even deeper. The molecule realm. You've
become the size of a molecule, just under two nanometers wide. At your new tiny scale,
the droplet now seems as big as the moon to a regular human. The blade of grass it rests on
could reach from the tip of Alaska to the end of Australia. And the park is now almost the size
of the solar system. But instead of mostly empty space, it is filled with stuff. Everywhere you
look, there are innumerable amounts of molecules and atoms. The rigid walls of the grass cells
beneath you are clearly vibrating, rippling with waves of energy. The water droplet contains nearly
a sextillion water molecules that are all in motion. Water is actually a storm of H2O molecules
smashing into each other hundreds of trillions of times a second. Each of them is moving at speeds
of around 2,300 kilometers an hour and bombard their surroundings mercilessly, sending small
objects hurtling in all directions. This is the source of the invisible current that you noticed
when you were 1000 times larger. scaling the speed up to the human scale is impossible as a
human sized molecule would be 2000 times faster than the speed of light. All this furious motion
comes from heat. Heat is a bit abstract at our human scale, where you touch something and get
a vague sense of whether it's hot or cold. But down here, you really feel what heat is the motion
of molecules vibrating, twisting and colliding as if they're inside a furious ball pit. When
these molecules lose heat, they move more slowly and collide less often. When they gain heat,
they speed up and smash together with renewed further temperature is basically the measure of
the average speed of these fantastic dancers performing all day. Suddenly, a molecule hits
you especially hard, and you're catapulted out of the water droplet into the air again. And here,
you see something unexpected. The stuff between the air molecules, nothing between the molecules
that make up the air, there is a vacuum. On average, a molecule in the air travels for
about 60 nanometers, which is about the length of a hockey rink if it were the size of a human. If
we were to compress all the molecules and atoms buzzing around in the room you're watching this
in, they would only film about 0.1% of its volume. 99.9% of the space around you is a vacuum,
you just don't notice it. Which also means that every time you take a breath, you breathe in
mostly nothing with a few atoms. The subatomic realm. At your size of under two picometers,
scale starts to lose its meaning. A human would be nearly 2 billion kilometers tall relative to
you, so large they could stretch their arms from the sun to Saturn. An atomic nucleus would be the
size of a grain of sand you could hold on the tip of your finger. That grain holds 99.97% of
the atoms mass. The rest, a sphere of influence about as large as the Eiffel Tower from your
perspective, is filled with an electron cloud. That's basically all the places where electrons
might be at any given moment in time. Electrons are shape shifters that morph around outside a
nucleus, creating a new and vibrating mess of different shapes with every new moment. Unlike
the graceful motion of planets, the atomic nuclei are chaotic blurs. They bulge, roll, quiver, and
breathe. They hold back the same energy that powers nuclear bombs, and it doesn't let them sit
still. They twist and vibrate six-dillions of times a second. It's time to end our journey and return
to... What you doing? Stop it! The smallest place. We have reached the bottom, the border between
reality and unreality. The scale here is the Planck length, which is the distance light travels in a
Planck time. Planck time is the time it takes light to travel a Planck length. Hmm, okay. None
of our models of the universe make sense at scales smaller than this, so for now, this is it. We
think that down here, particles bubble into existence and then spontaneously disappear,
creating a quantum foam of unimaginable energy. Can we go even smaller? We don't know. It's time
to return. If you look up, the universe is large and strange, so incredibly large and strange. But
if you look down into the tiny and extremely tiny, the universe seems even larger and even
stranger. In the end, the perfect place might be where you are right now. Not too big, not too
small. I'm ready. We did it. It worked. Right under our noses, there's so much hidden that we
never get to see with our own eyes. Entire realms of bizarre structures and outlandish creatures.
What a magical place this is. A forest of slime molds, single-celled organisms that work together
and form fungus-like structures. But we don't have time to hang out with these calm fellows any
longer. Shh, now we're in the kingdom of the mighty tardigrades. Don't disturb them in their
death-like slumber. Don't worry though, they'll wake up once the conditions are less rough. Oh,
didn't mean to get in the way. Your cells are hustling to keep you alive, coordinating myriads
of proteins. This might be the weirdest place yet, with no up or down. There's way too much going on,
better move on. Now we're inside one of the parts that allow you to watch this video. The structure
of a microchip is so small, it nearly breaks the rules of the quantum realm. Wait, something's
happening. These hidden worlds are all part of our 12,023 human-era calendar. This time, you can join
us on a journey through the microcosm. With each turn of the page, you will reveal a new world you
didn't know existed right beneath your feet. You know the drill by now. As always, it's a super
high-quality calendar, very shiny, and only available for a short time. We also have a
few special deals for you in our shop. The calendar is a true piece of Kurzgesagt you can
take home with you. And we say this every year, but it's true, every calendar purchase directly
supports what we do here at Kurzgesagt. And that's not just creating videos, but sparking curiosity
all around the world. So because of you, we can spread knowledge and ignite an appreciation for
space, nature, and life in people everywhere. Thank you so much for making this possible.
Have a wonderful 12,023. See you down in January.
