There is no greater human joy than waking up to a winter wonderland that, with its frosty magic, also cancelled school.
Well, no more, because schools are cancelling snow days.
Some school systems have decided distance learning has worked so well, might as well keep those tools around.
This way, when there's too much snow to physically drag students in, we can still mentally drag them in.
What kind of villains are you?
The worst kind. The kind doing something for your own good.
You don't want students to miss learning, do you?
We all agree that each and every individual day of school matters to keep kids from falling behind.
We don't all agree. This is horrifying.
Internet, where are you? Where's hashtag save snow days to protect us?
Shh, we don't need that.
No, you cannot take away the human experience of being on a dark winter's night, unable to face the next day.
Then, when thin clouds appear on the horizon, giving you faint hope, you beg with all of your belief to make it happen.
And when it does happen, it is the most epic experience of low to high.
Combining the triple joys of snow and freedom and getting out of something that you totally shouldn't have,
there are only so many days of such great glory in a human life.
But, say some school boards, that number of days will be zero forever.
And I fear this snow day cancellation pestilation will spread
because the school system, with its bureaucracies and committees,
loves its checkboxes checked, its percentages maxed, and its attendance punch cards punched.
Snow days mess all that up, so the system wielding the ultimate banality of evil cancels snow days.
Look, I'm just gonna say it. This is a crime against childhood.
Yes, I am going to play the won't somebody please think of the children card.
Teenagers, I know you hate this, but it's in your best interest to just roll with it.
But seriously, protecting snow days is what this card was made to play.
Those who want to cancel snow days should be forced to look into the wide, excited eyes of a little girl
waking up to experience her very first snow day and tell her,
No, you can't play outside. Why? Because it's super important that today, right now,
you learn about what a newspaper front page in England 300 years ago thought was important.
And you also must know the French conjugation of the verb to have fun.
This. This is what matters.
If you can do that while thinking you are doing good,
you are a heartless monster extinguishing the light of a child.
A child who, while on their kiddie conference call with their ickle headset,
listening to a teacher tell them fractions are fun too,
will resolve the cognitive dissonance by deciding the whole world is pointlessly cruel,
and with a sigh say,
This is the way it is. This is how it will be.
Humanity is subservient to checkboxes.
No. This shall not pass.
Don't cancel snow days. Cancel killjoy committees.
Hashtag save snow days.
