So the scene that he's going to be doing is from later on in the book.
It's towards the end.
Right before the climax.
If you know typical 3X structure, this is the end of Act II.
This is the protagonist's lowest, most heartbreaking point.
This scene is a parody of New Moon, where Edward dumps Bella for her own protection.
An excerpt from Awoken by Sarah Ellington.
Chapter 19.
Crushed.
My time with you has been pleasant, he said.
His voice was strained.
But I must depart.
I looked at him again.
When will I see you again?
His face grew hard.
I cannot say.
You cannot say? I demanded.
After all we've been through?
After Phantom?
Riley took a deep breath.
And his cool green eyes found my mud gray ones.
I...
You've opened my eyes so much, I said.
There is so much more of the universe that I understand now.
Because...
Because of you.
He stayed silent.
I started to get irritated.
Tell me what's going on!
I demanded.
If there's something wrong with me,
or if there's some other woman in the picture,
I have a right to know!
I am merely stating facts, little tiny ones.
But you said-
I said a great many things, puny one.
Sorry, Riley Bello is the next line.
I said a great many things, puny one.
Do I still even have a heart?
It felt broken, obliterated, evaporated,
gone with the sanity of so many minds destroyed by the great Cthulhu.
And yet the thought of his callous disregard for the human mind,
his power, only comforted me.
Jesus Christ, Peter.
Sorry, sorry.
I'm editorializing, I shouldn't be.
No!
No, I still wanted him.
I still loved him, and I didn't believe him.
I don't believe you!
I cry.
Why resist a call then?
Was this what it was to be driven mad by great Cthulhu?
Riley-
Please, you don't mean this.
I-
I love you.
You cannot comprehend me, paltry diminutive one.
Diminutive.
Diminutive one.
Thank you, girl.
Therefore, you cannot love me,
and that is why I cannot go out with you.
It has been weeks to you, diminutive being,
or less than seconds to me, Riley said quietly.
To me, the time was nothing, as you are nothing.
But-
But what about the pumpkin ball?
He turned from me.
I thought for a moment I saw a tear slide down his cheek.
I-
I cannot take you to the pumpkin ball.
I cannot be your boyfriend, it's an infinite moral.
Then go ahead and do it now, I wept.
Go ahead and kill me.
Destroy the world.
My life is nothing without you, do you hear me?
It began with you, and it will end with you.
You have fulfilled your purpose, my Lapushian child, he said.
Fulfilled the prophecy, thereby postponing as a thought's awakening.
Now is not the time.
I cannot do it now.
I grab his brave booboo t-shirt.
Then devour me!
I can't live now, not without you.
You can't possibly just leave now, leave me in this pain.
Devour me so my life will at least serve some purpose to you.
Pain?!
He snapped, jerking away from me, picking me full.
Speak not to me of pain, incontestable mortal.
You are no too trifling to understand the immensity of all the word can apply.
You know nothing of pain, do you understand?
Nothing!
That's not true!
I yelled, sprawled out on the driveway.
The agony burrowing through my veins, preventing me from even getting to my knees.
If you have a shred of mercy and you drive me mad like you have done so many others,
consume my sanity or just go ahead and devour me whole.
Whatever it is you do, but don't leave me.
I must itty bitty one.
I can see the thesaurus entry.
This is true!
Earlier today we have reached number seven on Amazon Kindle young adult paranormal sales.
But in paperback we reached 18 in young adult sci-fi.
How did you stay sane while learning this book?
It was a lot of fun.
We would all get together in a google doc in the chat room with a google doc
and just like bounce ideas off each other.
Someone would be like, all the chapters should start with the letter C.
Like that's brilliant!
So considering that you kind of took the food just to shit over with the
have you gotten any of that?
Just today people like you know there's like there's a Lovecraft reddit
and uh and also on Fark like
Yeah on Fark they were very upset
and then like they raped the midnose.
No Sarah Ellenson raped the midnose.
Well someone on Fark figured it out like okay this is she's a mom with five kids
and she's writing about Cthulhu and uh like her twitter footprint only goes back to May.
Clearly this is a troll.
Yeah this is fake.
Since Twilight is Mormon abstinence porn
are you going to fetishize anything like they did abstinence?
Well Sarah is a reform and a protestant.
We made up a fake religion for Sarah.
And it's funny like on her tv tropes page people have been like arguing about it.
All the hidden reform and a protestant messages that are in this book.
Not to like be mean or anything but were you ever too concerned like
oh no this is starting to sound too good there's too much ever being important to this.
Yeah we definitely got to that.
I think we're still at that point.
No I was reading someone's someone was live tweeting their responses to reading the book
today and I was following her I was like what's she saying about our book and she's like
I'm actually surprised like how well thought out and how cohesive this is.
It's so much better than half of YA I've read.
I know.
Damn it.
Yeah someone else's comment was like the worst thing I can say about this is that it feels like
a pretty good second draft but it's like it's there's so much thought and effort obviously
in this and it's actually very solid and cohesive.
I don't know how I feel about this.
YA has gotten though.
Are there any YA's you guys would suggest that you read?
Like recent YA's?
I'm reading the book thief right now it is amazing.
It's not sci-fi we're normal though.
Yeah The Fault in Our Stars I whipped.
Anything by John Green.
Yeah definitely.
Um I'm trying to think of something that stars as a girl and was written by one.
Like something written by real man Ash.
I recently read one called Daughter of Smoke and Bone by Lady Taylor.
It wasn't amazing but it was pretty entertaining and not horribly offensive.
It was a little original.
Yeah and written by a woman.
I think I liked the fifth wave I liked.
Okay I like the fifth I actually like the fifth wave a lot.
And written by a man.
Yeah it was written by a dude but it was it was very I mean it was like popcorn YA but it was
very fast I killed that one in a day.
I like it.
It's what Divergent should have been.
Yeah.
What do you think is or will be the most rewarding part of this entire experience?
Um I think writing it.
Yeah like we we just said so much like I'm although I'm really enjoying like the the reviews
and because we can't tell who's in on the joke.
Like making joke reviews there's you know flames and we're like are they actually flaming it
because it's silly and weird or are they flaming it because they're in on the joke and they
want to be controlled.
That's why the the park thing like was just so like delicious because they really did
until the guy gave it away like they really thought it.
A glorious hour this morning between 9 a.m and 11 a.m.
Two hours.
It was so funny it was so funny.
