Hey, how's it going? Let's talk about what it's like eating tons of soy for two months.
First, I should probably give you some background on what I normally eat.
Basically, whatever. Like, whatever I feel like eating at the time or when I'm hungry.
So, I'm not the most unhealthy of people. I tend to fluctuate between 11 and 12 stone,
which is like 160 to 180 pounds. I think I've got that right. Might be 150 to 170. I don't know. We
don't do pounds here. So, sometimes I'll eat, like, really healthily for a couple days and
sometimes I'll eat, like, a full, like, bag of Doritos for a meal. And sometimes I'll eat one
really, really big meal a day and nothing else. So, my metabolism is apparently really good because
it's compensated pretty well for the fact that I'm not very good at this whole food thing.
Back when I was an IT engineer, I tried to get really healthy for a while. I basically ate
nothing but fruits and a couple of specific vegetables, like peppers, kidney beans, and just
lentils and spinach. And that was about it. That was just all I ate for, like, every meal of the day.
And I got super healthy for a while. I lost tons of weight. I felt really good. And then I went out
for fish and chips with some friends, like, once. And as soon as I got home, I immediately had to
have a nap for, like, two hours. And I realized that what I was doing was I was being so, like,
rigid in exactly what I was eating that I was training my body to be unprepared for
anything remotely fatty or sugary and it just messed with me. So, I kind of started eating
normally afterwards and sort of lived in fear of going on any kinds of diet of any kind afterwards.
And apart from whatever amounts of soy that you get in normal people food, I haven't intentionally
eaten anything soy-based for most of my life. I've never really eaten anything vegan-y or tofu-y
before. When I was about 22, I went in to get a blood test because I was really worried about
testosterone stuff at the time, and my results came back really high for both T and DHT.
And, uh, that's actually why you're, you know, I'm going to go bold in the next 12 to 15 minutes
because, uh, that's what having high testosterone can do, although it's disputable. But I like to think
that's why. I love bringing this up, you know. Compared to me, like, 78% of the human male
population are low T-betas, and yet I look like this! It's almost as if endocrinology is a little
bit more complicated than what Davis Aurini and his science advisor looked up on the internet in
five minutes. Speaking of Davis, he actually left a comment on the last video that I want to read
out now. God, you're bitchy like a woman. Imagine being almost 40 years old, like, that close to
the halfway point of the cosmic human miracle that is your life, the one that you get, and spending
it arguing in the comments of YouTube videos on the internet. I want to feel sorry for Davis, but
it's just too funny. Actually, hold on one second. I'm gonna check if it's not, like, a parody account or something.
Yeah, it's real! The fact I had to check to see that that was just a parody of Davis
probably says quite a lot. You know, when I came up with that character that was sort of making fun
of people like him, but especially him, a couple of years ago when he's running around with a sword,
I thought, that's a bit much. They're not that silly. But no, as of two months ago, I checked
Davis's channel, and there he is looking like a slightly microwaved cypher from the Matrix
reviewing a sword that he bought online for, like, $500.
Oh yeah, I bet I look so badass right now.
Do you want some cantaloupe? I cut up a lot of melons making this video.
Hi Davis, by the way. I know you're gonna watch this, so, uh, maybe leave a better complaint in
the comments this time. That said, the testosterone results I got were years ago now. I was maybe
thinking of getting, like, a before and after test when I was doing this experiment, but doctors are
really, really busy now, especially thanks to the policies that people like Paul voted for,
and I didn't want to waste more of their time to get extra research done on a YouTube video.
That felt kind of disrespectful of their time. So, for the soy boy diet, I basically took everything
that was meat, eggs, or dairy, and replaced it with some kind of, uh, soy-based equivalent. So,
I had a lot of soy-sages, a lot of soy-gers. That's not a real thing.
And tons of soy milk. I don't actually drink that much milk normally. I think milk's
rubbish, but in coffee, I have milk, so I replaced that with soy milk. It tasted really nice,
by the way. That was the first thing I noticed. Soy milk has a really, like, nice taste to it.
I avoided all the vegetarian foods that are made of stuff like corn. Corn food is, like,
some kind of fungus and also egg albumin that's been cultivated a certain way. Apparently,
it tastes good, but it sounds awful, and there's no soy in it, to my knowledge, so I ignored all
of that. I also obviously just ate, you know, regular tofu that I'd bought and cooked different
ways. The initial barrier to tofu, by the way, is taste. Tofu in its nascent state is tasteless,
smells a little bit weird, and wet. You have to drain it or press it to get all of the water out.
You have to put in a lot more effort just to get an actual taste out of it. However,
people usually use that as a way of comparing it to meat and showing that it's less good,
but actually, after doing some looking into this over the course of this stuff, I've realised that
that's not quite a fair comparison. Like, all the meat that you buy in a store has been flavoured
or processed in some way to give it a sense of taste. You can't just cut a bacon-sized slice
off a pig and fry it. That will probably not taste that great. Anything that's been processed or
cured, that's what you're tasting in the meat when you eat it. You're not actually just, you know,
there isn't a nascent good taste to animals, it turns out. We have to make it taste all right.
With the sausages, the first thing I noticed was that they were incredibly similar to regular
sausages because the actual meat wasn't the thing you were tasting in sausages. You were actually
tasting all of the fun herbs and stuff that had been mixed in with it. And that stuff tastes nice
even when there's no actual meat involved, it turns out. So I had a pretty okay time on this.
Something I got really into eating right away was I would just cut up some tofu and microwave it
with these chilli kidney beans that you can buy at the co-op and I would just eat that for a meal
and it was really quick to make and also it was really, really filling. So I had a good time with
that. I wouldn't cook that for someone else, that's, you know, that'd be rubbish, but I got
into eating tons of that right away because it was so quick and simple and it satisfied the tofu
requirements for this diet. I mostly stuck to it pretty fine. I had a couple of times where I broke
it on purpose because I was eating with, like, family for Christmas or New Year's and I couldn't
be bothered to, like, bring a soy chicken to Christmas dinner. Actually, I think the most
disturbing thing about my family was how when I told them about this thing they were like,
yeah, that's, that's something he would do. Like, my family have come to expect this sort of thing
from me and it's a little bit worrying, to be honest. My initial starting weight was 13 stone
and one pound, but that was while I was carrying a Canon C100 with a 24-105mm lens, which is actually
pretty hefty, but I really wanted to do the shot where I was looking down at the scale while I was
weighing myself. This is my mother's bathroom, by the way, I don't own a scale. What am I, a
functioning adult? To get my actual weight I decided to just weigh my camera again on the
same scale, which didn't work because it's not heavy enough, so I weighed it on a kitchen scale.
All right, 2,543 grams. That's 5.6 pounds. 183 take away 5.6 is 177.4 pounds, which is a lot
for me, actually. After doing the diet for two months, I'm not going to give you all that rigmarole
again. I weighed 11 stone and 2 pounds, so 156 pounds. So eating a bunch of soy made me lose
23 pounds without having to do anything? That's a pretty significant difference for just a slight
change in what I was eating. Imagine what a difference it would have made if I'd bothered
to exercise. In all the really compromising photos I took over the course of this diet,
I didn't notice any marked change in my actual shape. I didn't become more effeminate in any
way that was measurable, and I didn't grow breasts any larger than the ones that I already
have. I also didn't get significantly fitter or have that much more energy than I normally had
either, so it turns out that soybeans aren't magical. Basically I proved exactly what everyone
expected this would prove in the most boring and straightforward way possible. It turns out that
soybeans are just a kind of bean that you can eat, and it doesn't make that much of a difference.
Great. Hooray. This is why I didn't bring this up much in the main measured response video,
by the way, because it made no difference. There was, like, nothing really worth bringing up,
so I thought I'd save it for this little thing. At the very least, I didn't become weirdly airbrushed
or turn red like Alex Jones' supplements seemed to do for him. Watch out for that, by the way,
Paul. I think by far the most substantive change I've noticed is an increased prevalence in what
Reddit likes to call the ghost poop, which is you go to the bathroom, and then when you wipe,
you discover you didn't really have to because it came out in one solid, contiguous, beautiful piece.
I wouldn't call that a ghost poop, by the way, Reddit. Um, I would call that when you, uh,
take a shit and you don't need to flush because it went down the drain all on its own.
I don't think tofu is that much healthier than meat. I mean, obviously processed meats have been
linked to an increase in cancer risk, but with the kind of meat you can get at a butcher, I don't
think there's a huge difference health-wise. That said, soy milk is way better than regular milk.
Regular milk is garbage. Don't even get me start—I—I got myself started. Milk is, like,
just absolutely rubbish. Humans have been lactose intolerant for most of our history. Like,
the ability to drink milk is something we only really developed, like, 7,500 years ago, and even
then, tons of humans are still lactose intolerant. It's ridiculous. And then it still had shit in it
that would be, like, poisonous to drink. Like, it made people really sick anyway until Louis Pasteur
came along and invented pasteurization. I wonder where he got that name from. And then it was
finally mostly safe for some humans to drink milk. The fact that we still drank milk prior to the
1860s, where we haven't developed a way of making it not poisonous, speaks volumes as to both the
rubbishness of milk and to why humans are just rubbish. Soy milk, on the other hand, is low in fat,
high in protein and vitamins, contains zero cholesterol, uh, it tastes great in my coffee,
which is all I drink milk for anyway, because milk is weird. Oh, and it's not full of estrogen.
Oh, by the way, did I mention that regular milk is full of estrogen? Not, you know,
fakie fake planto phytoestrogen. Mammal estrogen. The kind that affects mammals?
You know, the cows make milk for baby calves, right? How's that for hormonal havoc, Kayla?
I don't know why I'm getting so annoyed about this. I think the main thing this taught me
was to bother to think about what I'm eating. Having to actually measure what's in food and
look at labels has caused me to think more about what I'm actually eating, which I really wasn't
before. I've never counted calories, I've never thought about fiber, carbohydrates, fat, protein,
anything like that before, and the modicum of research I had to do for making these videos has
caused me to go, well, if I actually thought about this just a little bit, I could vastly improve,
like, the actual state of my body. So there has kind of been a positive effect for this, but it's
nothing to do with the food itself. It's all just been the lessons I've learned over the course of
trying it. So I wouldn't really recommend the soy diet to anyone, you know, there's no spectacular
effects, but I would recommend looking into what you eat and how to improve it. I'm actually really
obsessed with responses to the Super Size Me documentary. Like, Morgan Spurlock, uh, made a
couple of, like, quite important methodological mistakes. So tons of shills for the fast food
industry or, like, weird paleo diet people have come out with these semi-legitimate criticisms in
order to push their own personal agenda. I think it's hilarious. There's this great documentary
called Fat Head, which I've seen more than most actual films, that basically, uh, takes a couple
of the legitimate problems with Super Size Me and turns them into, like, just,
["And here's why you should eat fucking steak every day!"
That topic is actually on the big board of weird niche subjects that I'd love to make a video about at some point,
so, uh, mention in the comments if you'd like me to do something like that. That's actually something
that I've noticed with YouTube skepticism for a while now. No one's bothered to mine the area of
health and diet science yet, which is bizarre because it's such a fantastic thing to delve into.
You know, like, uh, nutritionist is not a legally protected term, right? So you have Kayla Daniels'
everywhere, and they're, like, saying stuff that's really easy to make fun of and debunk. We've got
all kinds of stuff like that, and yet we're so busy talking about, you know, moon landing conspiracy
theories or feminists when there's this whole thing that we could be doing. I think that's great.
I'm also going to look into a book by Tim Ferriss called The 4-Hour Body, which I've heard is actually
fairly similar to the kind of diet I adopted a couple years ago when I got pretty healthy and
then had a weird experience with some fatty foods. Uh, apparently his diet, uh, suggests some kind of
cheat day where you eat a ton of calories and fat and stuff to sort of reset your metabolism
every now and then. I'd love to have a version of the stuff I ate then that actually works properly
and lets me occasionally eat fatty things without having to have a nap afterwards. I think I might
start going to the gym more after this. Like, I joked earlier, imagine what it would have been
like if I'd bothered to exercise, and I actually quite liked imagining that. So, you know, I'll give
that a shot. Anyway, thanks for watching this quick update on all the weird stuff I've been putting
into my mouth. Normally at the end of my videos, I used to do readings of the credits, but then
unfortunately too many lovely people decided to help fund me making weird stuff like this, so the
credits started being super long. It's actually starting to affect the length and pacing of my
videos to a degree that I think is not good for the videos themselves, so I'm going to change it
over. Uh, this and one more time I'm going to do readings of the credits just so everyone who wants
to be in them has a chance to, and I can correct if I get the names wrong this time, and in future
I'm going to have different rewards for backers at that level. So I'm going to do streams of me
editing the videos and some other stuff like that. If there's other stuff you think I should
do for backers like that, please let me know. But in the meantime, it's thanks for allowing me to
afford to spend the time, effort, and money doing ridiculous stuff like this. I'd really like to thank
Three-fifths of a Brain, A Fish Named Nabby, A Bowl of Creamy Tomato Soup, Ace Creation,
Acelyn, Adult Sword Owner, Aelia, Al Swigert, Alistar, Thank You For Playing Life Is Strange,
Alesha Lemons, Alex Lemkovic, Alexander R. Corbett, Alice Forbes, Alicia Parker Martel,
Alison Thimesh, Amontillado, An Egg Painted To Look Like A Man, Andrew Foltz, Andrew Gilly,
Andrew Scheimer, N.E. Madman, Agri Konu, Ash Stryker, Austin J. Duby, Avi Finkel, Aidan 3A,
Benedict Marco, Bissot and Jenny, Brennan Arts, Brett Gillespie, Brian Parr, Bryce Pullen,
Brooks Woodhill, Sis Is Piss, aka The Ambivalent Magnificence, CJ Is A Hot Boy Hot Boy Hot Boy
Hot Boy, Kate Scythe, Calminos, Jaboy Cami Rosé, Chad Falatic, Charlie Bartlett, Checkmate Pony,
Chiaki Nanami Ultimate Gamer, Chris Okola, Christopher McDonald, Christopher Petroni,
Kieran, Klausu, Kobolath, Kobiza, Commissar Taco, Daniel Sullivan, Daniel Vincent Chilton,
Danielle Montanari, David Old, David Rose, Davis Remy, Dravinsky, Iko, Eden Yankovic-Zumar,
Eytan Goldstrom, Elijah Scanlon, Ellie, Elliot Soden, Eric Bronner, Eric Hunter,
Eugene Butler, Evan Ritchie, Femininja, Findley Boikopoli, five-time world heavyweight champion
Patrick the Breezy P. Finnegan, Flagburner, Florian Knox, Frank Stevens, Frick, the unironic
love for Sonic guy, Fruit, Garrett Lathy, Garrett Mitchell, Gary Marshall, Gnostic Dude, Google
Hushabye Valley or I'll give you a swirly, Graff and Blackpaw, Gracie Lipscomb, Grick Von Ghul,
Hayley, Handsome Unlimited, Heba Asad, HeroOfTime88, HeroRewar, I found Wookiee
Sphincter tickling rubber gloves in a loot box, I don't know, like a butt or something,
I, I, Senpai, I, Icy Kitty, it turns out I was wrong about everything, Jacob Hamblin-Pike,
Jacob Oman, James, James Adair, James Id, Jan Anders Bremer, Jason Walter, Jeffrey Theobald,
Jerry Terry, Joe, Joe if you're watching this, Willow told you so, Joey Meyer, John Mignone,
John Pettersen, John Stevenson, John Cantwell, Jordan Barrett, Jordan Tullis, Josh, Josh Ireland,
Julia Bashand, Justin Conquerbeard, Justin Partridge, Justin Whitney, Jurgen Jokli,
Kay Played Dota, Caffsyle, Kelly Mariella Kay, Kevin Thurber, Kevin Flynn, Kit Foley,
Krista Collin, Kristian Fekete, Kurt C. Yost, Kyle Dobson, Lance Manley, Lauren, Liam Jones,
Liz Castro, Lord Christine, Lord Sir Mr. Supercalinealistic Expialidocious of House
Hanmore, Lucas Cucon, Luke Fowler, Luke Swanson, Maximillian Varga, Marco Shard,
Maria the Maiden of Blue Fire, Mark Harmon, MacArthur, Michael, Michael H. Prey, Mike Stanley,
Minty-fucking-Fresh, Mirac Rezai, Momi, Mr. Clonam, My Bisexual Awakening is Happening,
Naoto Shirogane, Nathan Hoare, Nier Photoson, Nicholas Vu, Nick Schwert, Nifflet, Niltiak
Stealer of Souls, Nocturnal Puff, NotReal, Nullrush, Owen Piper, PK Love, Pete West,
Please Brandon, I want you to be friends with me, Qui-Gon Jinn, Goodnight Sweet Prince,
Rebecca Chang, Rebecca Harold, Recovering Zombie, Rhys Walmsley, Richard Pearson,
Ricard Hevosmar, Riley Van Dyke, Robert Phillips, Rose Gardner, Rossetti, Roo,
Ryan William Cox, S. Peter Davis, Salem Alarak, Samayel, Samuel Butler, Samuel Vergara Ekman,
Sarah Prasak, Scott Gertin, Scott Mendenco, Seamus Usarian, A Serpent Perplexed,
Sean Kemp, Seth, That Ginger Bastard from Texas, Shadowbag, Sheena Artrip,
Siegfried, Slayer of the Immortal Dragon, Sigma Vega, Silas Pumpkins, Syntharana, Sky Young,
Sol, Sprinkle, Spunker McGraw, Stepan Babchuk, Steven Notley, Super Depressing Lifestyle
Championship Edition, Swamp Selkie, Sidney Steverson, Silien, Tatanator, Tapio-Unto-Oscari
Turonan, Te-Uberbase, Remi, Thad Wazielewski, The Spectre of Communism, there once was a Soviet
Spetsnaz agent called a Nuclear Depth Charge, Thomas Kistner, Tom Martel, Totally Radical Politics,
Troy Brophy, Troy Heath, Tyler aka Giggs, Tyler Howard, Ure, Very Tizzy Izzy, War Garble Smurf,
Wack Man, I love that name, Warren McKay Parsons, Wiebke, xxx underscore swagmaster420 underscore xxx,
ya dumbass boy Nathaniel timezone austria talon, Zachary Clark, Zach Strickland, a left so far
divided it collapses into a black hole, Obujee, Dane Steven, Dee Warwick, Devon's Hands Melt,
Hjort Dog, Jordan Hoxie, Lissy Roberts, Juan underscore shoe, Parker Anderson, Sleuth,
The God Forsaken Strongest Rat Alive, Tis What She Declaimed, Willow H, xx underscore antfucker69
underscore 420 xx, and thank you for pronouncing the four x's, and Ausgerer, Usgeer's Daughter.
If I didn't get that name right or any others for that matter, please let me know and I'll issue a
correction in the last video where I do the credits. Thank you very much. Seriously, thank you all so
much. It's absolutely amazing. I'm still shocked. I mean, I set up the reward where I read names out
because I thought like six people would ever do it, and here I am with too many that I can't
really do readings of the credits anymore without adding like 10 minutes to a video. It's amazing.
