Ah, it's good to be back.
When we last left off, I performed raw, hardcore, mostly uncensored analysis of all of Armored
Skeptic's data supporting his view of gender expression.
Which didn't take too long, because he didn't have any.
This time, we're gonna do some more of that, about some more people.
Nothing particularly unique this time, I just thought it'd be nice to cover a few more people.
I wanted to do more last time, but the video started to feel like it was dragging, y'know?
Let's have another look and see if there are any decent rebuttals to Nye's recent work.
We'll be looking for a couple of basic things, like if the arguments actually hold water
when you look at them, uh, if they have any, uh, sources or data that they cite, if they
put it in the description, so people can click to check if it's actually right or not.
Uh, y'know, really basic stuff like that.
I'm sure that's a low bar that no one will be tripped over, right?
WHO'S FIRST?
[♪ intro music ♪
BOOM
Well, there's this Mouthy Buddha guy.
His attempts to criticize Rachel Bloom's musical segment caused him to devolve into screaming
MY PUSSY over and over until he was literally just reverberating and pulling a stupid face.
MY PUSSY!
MY PUSSY! MY PUSSY TALKS!
MY PUSSY!
MY PUSSY!
He seems like a lovely individual.
He's using the very popular rhetorical strategy of acting like a fucking idiot and then saying
THAT'S WHAT I THINK FEMINISM IS!
ME BEING STUPID PROVES THEY'RE STUPID!
I put some jokes at his expense in the last video, and I thought it would be funny to just use
that clip of him doing that and then not go back to him ever again.
But even if I wanted to do more than that, I'd have some trouble because the video is mostly
just him whining about how morally evil it is that Rachel Bloom empowered ignorant women,
and how betrayed he feels by Bill Nye for not saying what he decided was true about the issue.
Dude, name the smartest people in the world.
They all think this gender fluidity shit is BULLSHIT!
🎶
🎶
🎶
🎶
No evidence is necessary to support his beliefs, apparently.
Who is this empowering?
It's empowering ignorant women!
People that you are dancing with are making our civilized western culture
more and more degenerate every day.
I thought feminists were worthless and unproductive members of society,
but according to genius non-foot shooter Mouthy Buddha,
it turns out that actually, western civilization is so weak and vulnerable
that Rachel Bloom can destroy it with a song about her vagina.
Listen, mate, if you think our great civilization is that weak,
maybe you should move somewhere else.
Presumably back to the spitting image puppet dimension.
His other videos try really hard to be dramatic pseudo-documentaries
with text effects, ornate fonts, and important sounding music
as he talks in a dramatic voice about how IQ is totally a real measurement
of human ability and behavior.
We need to understand the validity of IQ
to know that this is real and predictive of human behavior.
🎶
You know, for someone who seems incredibly certain
that IQ is a valid and important unit of measuring a person's intelligence,
Mouthy Buddha doesn't appear to have listed his own IQ anywhere.
I invite you to come to the one conclusion there can be
about why he wouldn't do that.
These videos attempt to create the illusion that he's smart
and needs to be taken seriously, but he's already put out a video
where he whines and vibrates at a camera,
so the genie's out of the bottle there, mate.
While I could point and laugh at how he's a libertarian
trying desperately to backpedal from supporting the alt-right
after realizing that his bedfellows don't seem to realize
that eugenics is unethical,
or pretend that his other work means he's worth taking seriously,
I think it would be funnier not to.
Who's next?
Do you have any idea how reputationally damning this is?
Well, there's this guy who calls himself SomeBlackGuy.
His video's entitled,
"'Bill Nye Ruins My Childhood.'"
Oh dear, did the science man hurt your feelings?
But I thought rational people put facts over feelings.
Heh-heh-heh-heh-heh-heh-heh-heh.
Bill Nye is now diving into the magical fantasy land
of progressive identity politics,
and he's doing it by, uh, his show,
uh, Bill Nye Saves the World,
and I've only seen bits and pieces of it,
and I-I-I'm not gonna, I'm not gonna watch it all the way through.
Oh, great.
Not only has he not actually seen the show,
just the cherry-picked chunks that ended up on YouTube,
he doesn't even plan on watching it.
Points for honesty, I guess.
For most of the video, he plays clips
from the scant bits he has seen
and pauses them to cut away and try and make a clever riff.
Standard cutaway commentary stuff.
But it's actually a lot sexier than that.
I don't know about you guys,
but there's absolutely nothing sexy about this whatsoever.
Heh.
Bill said it was sexy for a joke,
and the audience laughed along because it was a joke,
but Derek says it isn't very sexy at all.
Oh, my God, he's got him.
He's owning him online with discourse.
Can you feel the logic and reason yet?
And then for the rest of the video,
he extemporizes about the horrifying state of the world
now that some people identify as non-binary.
And now you have a bunch of people that,
that just wanna be heard.
They want, they don't wanna be normal.
They wanna, they wanna live in this fantasy world
where there's all these different options and shit.
Oh, no!
People want to have options now.
Like, you're starting to see on, on websites
where they have multiple options for gender
where it was just always man or woman.
Now there's like, oh, fuck that.
No, I'm, no.
Non-binary or something else should be an option.
I'm like, why?
It's not that fucking serious, dude.
I mean, I know to a lot of people it is,
but in, in, in, in the, in the grand scale of things,
this is extremely trivial.
I agree, it is extremely trivial.
When someone comes up to me and says,
I'd rather you refer to me by these pronouns from now on.
I say, yeah, all right,
because it's really not that hard,
and it doesn't really affect my life all that much.
Oh, no, sorry, you meant the other kind of trivial.
The kind where you spend days of your life
recording YouTube videos, complaining about it
while insisting that it's trivial.
Sure.
I asked for a little help with that,
and who better to talk about sex
than two...sexy...
two...cis-male white guys?
This dude has fallen off the deep end.
Why couldn't these people,
why couldn't Bill Nye or anybody,
any cis white man,
or just a, a cis male for, for,
talk about this type of stuff?
Like, why is this even mentioned?
Why would you say that?
It, it, like, how is that even funny?
My favorite part of this clip is that he realizes
at the very end, asking these dumbass questions
about why would you dare say that,
that Bill was just making a joke,
so he suddenly cuts himself off and goes,
how is that even funny?
Like, you can see the moment he realizes
that maybe Bill Nye's sentence
shouldn't be taken literally seriously,
but he can't admit he fucked up,
so he just cuts himself off and goes,
well, I wasn't funny either.
Nye wasn't saying that cis male white guys
aren't allowed to talk about sex,
because they are.
They continue to do so after making the joke.
I'm really surprised by how easily
these folks are tripped by jokes.
Now, I could just systematically own Derek
for all the stupid shit he says
over the course of the video,
but I've set myself the lofty goal
of cutting through the chaff
and analyzing the core claims themselves
that appear to be holding up the rest of the rants
and seeing if at least they hold water.
You know, all this bullshit is bullshit,
but he might have a point in there somewhere,
so I did some digging and found Derek's central claim,
which is that Bill Nye has gone against the science,
and he knows this is what's happened
because real scientists used to say otherwise.
But now he wants to play make-believe
and say stuff like,
oh, gender is on a spectrum like sex, you know?
There's such a thing as, like, non-binary
and stuff like that when, you know,
before, like, any other science, uh,
or scientist that has come before him
has just said there's two genders
and they're determined by the chromosomes.
Chromosomes?
Whatever, he probably misspoke.
He doesn't provide any data or studies
to support the idea that gender is determined by chromosomes,
but he also doesn't even dare say that himself.
Instead, he says,
well, scientists say it,
and he believes those scientists over Bill
because, well, they say what he thinks is true.
Certainly not because he's seen the evidence himself
because then he'd have bothered to show it to the viewer
and not hide behind,
scientists say it, wouldn't he?
The funny thing is he tries and fails
to claim that this is what Bill used to say.
This next clip is unintentionally amazing.
Something that he said himself as well.
In an act of utter hilarity,
after saying this used to be what Bill said himself,
he cuts to a scene from an old episode of Science Guy
where someone who is definitely not Bill himself
explains chromosomes.
Before you're born,
your mom gives you one of her chromosomes
and your dad gives you one of his.
Now, we're gonna investigate that claim
in a little more detail in a sec,
but first, let's stop and think like video editors for a bit.
Look, it's my one actual area of expertise.
I was gonna shoehorn this bit in somewhere.
I'm going to be charitable here
and assume that Derek did some research in advance.
He probably at least watched some of the clips
from the ice cream bit or the musical bit
that people were spreading on YouTube
and saw people claiming on Twitter
that Nye used to say genders caused by chromosomes
and then hit record assuming Bill had actually said it.
Now, the question is,
why would he think Bill had actually said it himself
in the first place?
He must have got this idea from somewhere.
Well, in the spheres Derek runs in,
a very popular image was circulating on Twitter
with a picture of Bill holding up a diagram of chromosomes
with subtitles claiming they decide a person's gender.
These subtitles were fake.
Nye said nothing of the sort in that actual segment.
The image was spread by noted bastion of truth
and ant enthusiast Ian Miles Chong
in the hopes of convincing gullible idiots,
and, well, evidently it did.
It appears that Derek here took it for granted
that that was what Bill had said
and didn't even check it was true until after recording,
so he had to use this clip of someone else
saying something that you could twist
to be about gender instead.
Now, I'm just spitballing here.
There's no way of proving that's the exact chain of events.
Uh, Derek could have just missed
the widely shared lie
tweeted by Chong,
who he follows on Twitter,
and which was originally tweeted
just minutes before Derek tweeted,
why is Bill Nye all over my feed?
You know, it could have been a different chain of events,
but it wasn't.
Now, I'm not saying Derek saw a fake screenshot
and took it as fact without checking
and that this is antithetical to the very principles
he claims Bill Nye has abandoned,
but it certainly looks exactly like that.
However, let's ignore this blatant ignorance
and hypocrisy and talk a little about the segment
he did end up using, featuring someone
who isn't Bill Nye talking about chromosomes.
This clip is also widely used elsewhere
to claim Nye's previous show was right
and then he got infected by feminism or something.
Derek contrasts this old clip from 1996
with his present stance on the issue in his new show.
Many months later...
I used to think there were just two settings,
male and female.
At least you actually had a clip of Bill talking
about the issue this time, Derek.
The implication, of course, is that Nye has abandoned
the science and become a liar,
but this reflects a very poor understanding
of the absolute basics of Bill Nye's old show
and how it was constructed primarily
to give children a baseline understanding
of science in the 90s.
The old show, I hate to point out,
never really did cover sex, gender,
or sexuality in much detail, if at all.
Covering these issues on a show for kids in the 90s
was pretty much off-limits.
You'd come under fire for indoctrinating children
into an evil agenda and other gay panic nonsense
bullshit garbage.
You know, the sort of thing similar
Neo-Puritans would do in the modern day
if, let's say,
there was a YouTube channel aimed at educating kids
about these issues.
I wonder why the producers wanted to avoid
the ire of Derek's ideological predecessors
and risk getting pulled from the air
or sent death threats.
They steered well clear and, to my knowledge,
only ever barely broached the subject
of sex differences when it's in relation
to something else.
The segment all the idiots are pointing to
is from an episode about probability.
No, not sex.
Not here's an episode on how chromosomes work.
Probability.
Imagine for a moment that you're one of the writers of this show.
Let's say you're writing an episode of a science show
about probability,
and you have 23 minutes to explain it to an audience,
and an example you want to give
is the probability of which sex you were born.
And if Dad gives you an X2,
then you become a girl.
But if he gives you his Y,
then you become a boy.
Even though, because you know your stuff,
because you're a researcher for a show about science,
the science behind transgender people is known to you,
you're writing in an era where,
generally speaking, the terms
sex and gender are conflated in common parlance.
And you're writing a show for kids.
In fact, you're writing lines for an actual
kid to say, so you have her say,
if you have a Y chromosome, you're a boy
for convenience's sake.
You also wrote a funny skit where Bill picks the wrong door
to his lab and falls off the roof of a building.
Huh? Oh, oh, oh, oh!
Oh, boy.
See, there are only two possibilities.
You know, as a writer for the show,
that there's a probability of a person
being intersex or other rare
chromosomal differences that complicate this simple
one and two probability.
But you know that taking the time to explain this here
would mean cutting into the Wizard of Odds skit
where you reenact the Wizard of Oz
and Bill Nye is the Wizard.
If you want to improve the chances of getting home safely,
wear a seatbelt.
The chance of becoming either a boy or a girl
is always one in two.
A 50-50 chance either way.
It's like flipping a coin.
Mm-hmm.
X, you're a girl. Y, you're a boy.
You also, because you're not an idiot,
have done more than five seconds of research
and know that the probability in most industrialized
nations of being born physically male
is generally higher than being born
physically female, so the chances are more like
1.05 in two, meaning
it's not like flipping a coin so much as like
flipping a coin that's very slightly weighted
as a result of complex environmental factors.
And there's also the rare but real
possibility of the coin landing on its side.
You don't bring this up either, because Bill
really doesn't want to cut the skit where he counts
dice possibilities next to the giant fan
he stole from the set of Blade Runner.
And since the video is boiling down probabilities
for children, you leave it out,
hoping people more discerning of the science
will understand why you left it out,
and privately, you pray that none of the
kids in the audience will grow up to call Bill Nye
a liar when he explains the more complicated
version to them as adults.
Does he cite any sources to back up his claims
throughout the video? Why,
some black guy gives an exhaustingly
comprehensive list of his merch store,
Patreon, PayPal,
Second Channel, Twitch,
Instagram, Ask.FM, Snapchat,
email, Grindr,
Chimney, Splango,
et cetera, et cetera.
Unfortunately, he doesn't cite any
sources because he doesn't have any to
back up his beliefs, but he feels
very strongly that he's right, and that's why
you should check out the t-shirts for sale in his
merch store. For example, this one about
how facts are more important than feelings.
And he's right. In making an
informed argument, facts are
important. Would have been
great if he'd had any, wouldn't it?
Some black guy, more like
some lack of evidence
got, oh, cut that
out. That's just rubbish.
I hope you're sick
of bullshit because here's YouTuber
No Bullshit with his video entitled
Bill Nye Goes Full SJW
Trashes Whites
Praises Transgenders and Gays
and by no bullshit, I
apparently meant to say no sources.
I bet we're in for a real science
and research fest here.
...
...
...
I'm sick of people over
inflating the amounts of gay and transgender
people in the population, and I have nothing
against the people, don't get me wrong.
I'm just sick of this overly gay, overly
pro-trans narrative being pushed
everywhere. Everywhere that toes the line with
the liberal SJW PC
crowd. It's gotten beyond annoying and
is verging into unsettling and disturbing
places. When I clicked a video
by someone called No Bullshit, I thought
I was entering an intellectual thunderdome.
But so far, all he's done is
complain about the overly
gay, overly pro-trans
narrative that's being pushed
everywhere by the liberals. I thought
this was supposed to be about science,
but this guy's just sharing his feelings
about the liberals.
What is this? No Bullshit's whole deal
appears to be to pause during whatever
he's watching partway through to fantasize
about the deep, hidden
emotions or the evil agendas
of the people on screen.
God,
even the new theme song is shittier.
And it just screams, I'm desperate to be
cool and hip again. Here's a black guy singing
my theme song. I'm down.
Now either Mr. Bullshit, if that is his real
name, which I'm going to assume it is,
can read minds, or he's just written
an elaborate fanfiction about
Bill Nye wanting to look
hip, so he personally gets
Tyler, the creator, to make the new theme.
Because apparently no one else
is involved with the production of a show.
The man the camera's appointed at,
he personally writes it all.
He commissions everything that goes into the show.
He personally hires all the animators.
It's all Bill Nye. It's not like
there's a production crew or anything.
Who better to talk about sex than two
cis-male
white guys?
And this is also where
I lose all hope for the show.
Anyone who uses the word cis is either an
MW whack job, or they're someone who's trying
to pander to them. If you hear someone say a
word you don't like, pause the video to
complain about how that makes them the bad
people. Bonus points if you
then go on to make videos complaining about how
everyone else is easily offended by words.
They pull it off with
so much confidence that it doesn't
feel weird, it just feels like, hey.
So now we jump to Veritasium on location
in Korea. And to be honest, listening
to this K-pop weirdo talk,
I feel the same way Veritasium looks.
He looks squinty. He's looking
down on this creeper, raising his upper lip
in disgust. He looks
squinty, and that means he's
looking down on the person he's interviewing.
He secretly hates them.
This Rachel Bloom bitch sounds like she's
trying to be the next Amy Schumer or something.
My vagina. My vagina.
No one cares about your gross vagina,
lady. I'm not gonna even touch those
frankly Freudian comments
about finding vaginas weird.
Now as can be plainly seen, this
no-bullshit fellow doesn't really have any
understanding of the science and isn't all that bright
otherwise. So he doesn't even really
understand why he's so angry
that the show is too
pro-gay. So he wallpapers
over the cracks in his own understanding
by imagining that everyone
on screen is sad and
angry and hateful and wants to
look cool and is pushing an agenda
and is an evil liberal
and wants to be like Amy Schumer.
Which doesn't really make any sense.
No one wants to be like Amy Schumer.
Not even Amy Schumer wants to be like Amy Schumer.
Now, if I
really wanted to, I could go
through the entire video and make one of my
patented, citation-needed
jokes every single time he makes
a claim and then doesn't support it with any
evidence whatsoever. This still doesn't
change the fact that there are only two genders.
But instead, I decided to take a leaf out of his book
But instead, I decided to take a leaf out of his book
But instead, I decided to take a leaf out of his book
But instead, I decided to take a leaf out of his book
and just imagine that he likes the smell of his own
farts and then move on without thinking about him too much.
Ugh, we're running out of people
pretending they have compelling arguments.
Quick! What about Previous Appearance Have a
Red Pill Philosophy? The guy who couldn't even
remember the names of the main characters of
The Force Awakens in the car after getting out
of the theater? Maybe his video
Bill Nye's Netflix Show
Trashes White People, Glorifies
Transge-
Wait, haven't we seen that title before?
So it's like a game. You guys are
writing the same thing. I love that clip.
It's from Roosh complaining to some journalists
accusing them of secretly plotting to push
a unified narrative by writing
similar articles, as if there's a multitude
of ways of reporting about his legalized
rape article, but I like reusing
it in a better context of people in his
sphere copying each other's work.
I can't wait for them to start suing each other.
Those court cases are gonna be hilarious.
But speaking of doing the same thing, at this point, I'm
starting to see a lot of repeat performances
of people plotting out the same arguments again and again
in new, even more uninformed
incarnations. We've got the
lecturing the white race argument.
Some Indian dude came on
to Bill Nye's show
to lecture white people about cultural
appropriation! Prashant's
lectured the entire
white race on how it's unacceptable
to use Asian mysticism
because it's from a different culture.
You've got complaints that it's too political
to even talk about this stuff, or
outright fantasies of a secret liberal
agenda. Pushing leftist
liberal SJW narratives.
This episode is very clearly
politically driven. Oh, it's-it's-it's politics,
like, bringing the politics
into the science. And we've got the same sob
stories about how he used to like Bill, but
then he betrayed me! Bill Nye
is a childhood hero to a lot of people,
including myself. His television show
Bill Nye the Science Guy was informative,
innovative, and entertaining.
I was extremely excited
when Netflix announced that they'd be releasing
a brand new Bill Nye series.
You used to be a voice
for hard science.
When I was a child,
you were just this cool figure
for science. You are a representative
of science, and you just
shit over all of it! And of course
we've got the fantastic repeat performance
of not bothering to cite any sources or studies
to back up any of their claims.
At this point, my mind's a blur.
I can't honestly tell you what Red Pill Philosophy
said in his video, and the first time
I watched it, I wasn't sure if I'd somehow seen
it before and forgotten. I tried to re-watch
it and see if he says anything worth specifically
debunking, but my eyes just
slide off him and I start to think about
all the vacuuming I could be doing.
Bill Nye, the establishment guy,
is nothing but an establishment
shill, nothing but
establishment propaganda. If you go
to the Twitter page of that March for
Science, uh, Twitter page,
it's at establishment propaganda.
Bill Nye, the propaganda
guy. Bill Nye, the
establishment guy.
Um, so Bill Nye, the propaganda guy.
Bill Nye, the establishment shill guy.
At this point in my
quest, I was desperate for someone,
anyone who had something different
to say. It didn't even have to be right.
At this point, a different set of wrong
arguments would have been enough to make me feel
alive again, and then
out of the darkness came
Rage After Storm. Rage After Storm
is one of those YouTubers who
actively courts a far-right audience
and likes to talk about how race is real
and tweet about how Hitler had
some really good ideas. This video
is entitled Bill Nye, the
Jewish guy.
Please stop getting triggered over the Jew thing.
It's a reference to the nose.
It was just banter.
The video opens a little familiarly to begin with,
with the standard totally not-fabricated
Bill Nye sob story. I loved
him, and it made me want to think about stuff,
but then he said the bad thing. Look, I know
that so many people are starting to catch this
SJW virus,
but I never knew that it would be my
dearest Bill. I respected
him so much. No, really, he was
my muse.
But then she goes off the fucking chain.
She one-ups Armored Skeptic's
ice cream slut shaming and begins trying
to figure out which sexualities the ice
creams represent in the comedy
ice cream cartoon. You have
vanilla, that's straight. One of the flavours then has to
be a lesbian. One of them has to be gay.
One of them has to be bisexual. Okay,
someone over here is a fucked
up ice cream. She's trying to fucking
diagnose cartoon ice creams.
Which sexuality are you?
Let me get out my ice cream, Speculum.
Hey, mint chocolate chip!
Sorry I'm late. I was
busy being two awesome things at once.
Okay, nope. Choco chip is
obviously bisexual. This is weird.
Actually, chocolate chip is pretty
straightforwardly a metaphor for non-binary
or intersex people. You know,
being two awesome things
at once. Not enjoys licking
two different kinds of ice cream
at once. She can't even
pass the most basic point of the segment.
You're nuts.
Can we not encourage
gangbangs, please? Can we teach people
a bit of decency? Having a gangbang
is not something to be proud of.
Well, someone isn't invited to my
next house party, I can tell you.
Not because of that, though. Because of
the Hitler apologetics.
Again, this is exactly how STDs
spread. Being slutty is
not cool. No, being uneducated
about STDs and how they spread
is how they spread. Imagine that.
The real problem being
people being uneducated
on the issue. Imagine if that
was the real problem here.
So she continues to moral panic about how
the show is promoting being bi as cool
too much and how it's tricking people into
wanting to be bi, to be trendy. You know,
because that's how sexuality works.
Just in general, why are we advertising the fact
that bisexuality is cool?
This isn't a particularly uncommon approach
to sexuality either. You see it everywhere
in conservative criticism of progressive media.
Like with No Bullshit, the problem
isn't that LGBT people exist. Of course
not. They love gay people.
The problem is the overly
pro-LGBT narrative.
From their perspective, the issue
is people being too nice
about the bis, the
gyars, the lesbs
and the transes. And that
throws off the delicate balance
of nature or something.
They think these people are allowed to exist
and that's fine, that's okay. We've finally gotten
them that far. But
they have to exist in the background somewhere.
You can't accidentally make it look like
it's okay to be like that.
Because that's basically just pushing
their agenda on people.
None of it is meant to be like a fashion
craze or a trend or something that's cool.
Okay? It's not. This
provides people with pressure.
Pressuring people into becoming bi
and having orgies? Is that
really what the cartoon ice cream
skit does to people?
This might just be my opinion, but I don't think many
people are going to have their sexuality changed
or their identity radically
altered by media
presenting it as okay to not
be straight or not be, I'm
going to say the bad word, cover your ears,
cisgendered. I'm at the risk
of sounding a little bit stubborn here, but I just
don't accept that people who are
secure in their own sexuality are going to have theirs
changed by other people being open
about their own. Which is why my conscience
will be clear when, at the end of this sentence,
I cut to a graphic depiction
of what I get up to in my bed every
single night.
I'm playing Legend of Zelda Breath of the Wild.
You can play it anywhere because it's
portable. It's a really good game,
guys. But don't get me wrong. That doesn't
mean that there aren't very positive effects
of having good representations
of LGBT people in media.
This kind of goes without saying, but generally speaking,
it's healthy for a person
to feel like they're allowed to express
themselves and their identity without
fear of not being accepted
or of being treated like they're lesser
as a result of it. Perceiving
positive representations of LGBT people
as some kind of insidious
trick is, academically
speaking, very
stupid. Versatile love
may have some butt stuff.
Ew. I think that short clip of someone
saying butt stuff and cutting to her saying
ew sums up her coverage
of most of this episode. She seems to be
aware of how little she has to say, though,
so she quickly moves on to the episode dealing with
overpopulation and carbon footprint and
what to do about it. Someone on the panel
talks about the much lower carbon footprint
of people in a non-Western country
and we get this, well, just
watch. How many does the
average American- I did that with my coffee
this morning. Yeah, 16
metric tons is what the average-
160 times. Yeah, yeah,
exactly. And so our two
kids are way more problematic.
The Nigerians with an average
7 children are not the problem when it comes to
climate change. The reason why they have
so many fucking kids is not because
they care about what's happening
with the environment. I'm pretty sure Botswana
over in Africa is not
popping out kids and thinking, it's okay,
I can have this seventh kid, it's sustainable,
it's okay, I'm not using all this
CO2, I'm not creating greenhouse gases.
No, they have kids
to fuel selfish ways
of getting them to look after them when
they're older. They have kids because they know
that child that they're popping out
right now will probably die from famine,
diseases, or both. Contraception
for them is out of the window anyway, I mean,
they don't even know how to put on a fucking condom.
I mean, can we really trust these people to take
a contraceptive pill every day? Can
we really? The answer is no.
This video took a fucking turn.
She takes the comment about the lower carbon footprint
of people in Western Africa
and just goes off on a rant about how stupid
and bad those people are, how they can't
be trusted to put on a condom.
She doesn't even appear to notice that the image
she's using to stereotype an entire
continent of people is literally
taken from the website
nationalstereotype.com.
So should we have policies that
penalize people for having extra
kids in the developed world?
Um, so I do think that
we should at least consider it.
Oh yeah, that's a great idea.
So let's get people in Western countries
to stop.
I'll let this unhinged rant continue
but let's just pause for a second and keep in mind
that what the guy actually said was
I think we should at least consider it.
Remember that she's this angry
about a very non-committal
comment about how we should maybe
at least think about it.
Remember that she's angry here
about the idea of
thinking about something.
Let's get people in Western countries
to stop having kids, you know,
the people that are actually solving
the problems with climate change, so then
people in the third world can overpopulate
us.
That's right, Rage After Storm's talking about
the Great Replacement, the easily
debunkable idea that foreigners are going to
take over the West by outbreeding
us because of differences in birth rates.
They were importing these third worlders
into Western countries like Germany
where the population is aging
and on a decline.
They're importing foreigners and they're going to take over.
She even uses the phrase replacement rate.
If you'd like to know more about this idea
and why it's total bullshit, actual
skepticism user and skull reclaimer
Sean Andjen did a video
debunking it handily. So handily
that it got false flagged and taken down
for a while by idiots because its existence
was inconvenient for them.
Check it out. Rage's version of the Great Replacement
is even less informed and
even more overtly racist than it
normally is. And by saying to the residents
of the third world, oh yeah no
you keep on having kids, you
are basically shooting yourself in the
foot. When I'm out and about
and I see people with loads of kids
it's either people that look like
they dance around wind turbines with hemp
sandals on or
people who aren't really Western Europeans.
She concludes that the solution
is education. And I guarantee you
the way to solve this issue is
by education. I agree.
Some people could certainly do
with knowing a bit more about the issues
before they open their mouth to dog whistle
about being replaced by immigrants.
Mwah, mwah.
Now some people who are watching this video might
genuinely think the Great Replacement is
real or otherwise nod along with
similar scaremongering about immigrants.
And I bet those people feel hard
done by right now. I can imagine that
free speech fan 1488
has already paused the video to go
you didn't actually debunk the Great Replacement
you just made fun of how completely
fucking unhinged it sounds.
She cited a newspaper article
to prove that she's
right. Why didn't you bother
to debunk that? You're ignoring it.
You're afraid of the truth. Well hold your
horses mate. Let's look at that
newspaper article in
more detail.
Shall we?
Luckily, to her credit, Rage After Storm
in the interest of transparency
has put a link to all of the sources that she used
in the description of the video
including links to where she got the Bill Nye
clips from, a bunch of newspaper
articles calling Bill Nye a full of shit
baby man who said the bad things
from places like...
The Federalist? Not a publication
I had heard of but that's alright.
Let's just click the link to that source
in the description and...
Oh. Weird.
That link isn't
in the description.
I wonder why.
Instead, I had to find it myself by
googling the title. Oh boy!
It's an article from the Telegraph.
That bastion of accurate political
reporting entitled
9 in 10 babies born in parts
of Britain have a foreign parent.
That's the title. Do yourself a favour and keep
in mind for a second the phrases
9 in 10 and
parts of Britain. Now, let's
read the first paragraph.
Almost 9 in 10 babies
born in parts of Britain have at least one
foreign-born parent, official figures
have revealed for the first time. Almost
9 in 10. Well, we've already
stepped back one from the headline.
Almost 9 in 10 is not 9 in 10.
At least parts of Britain hasn't
changed. Oh well, maybe it's some
big parts. That's still a lot of people
with foreign-born parents even if it was 8
in 10. How about we read the
second paragraph? The Office
for National Statistics disclosed that
in 2012, more than
80% of babies born in
three London boroughs
had either one or both parents born outside
the UK. Oh, some more
backpedalling. Almost 9 in 10
is actually more than 80%,
which they refuse to pin down with the
actual percentage. I wonder why.
Actually, I know why. It's because the number wasn't
convenient enough. And these foreign-born
parents' children are being born at this proportion
in three London
boroughs. Just...
just for those of you who don't know, London
has 32 boroughs.
The Telegraph found a very small
part of Britain with a high relative
birth rate among foreign-born parents
and fudged the numbers enough to get
an attention-grabbing headline to make it look like
we're being swarmed by immigrant babies.
What they actually did was draw a very
small circle around a part of the country
where a lot more immigrants live than the native-born
population. The figures were published
amid concerns that hundreds of thousands of
migrants from Romania and Bulgaria
could come to Britain when restrictions
are lifted in the new year.
Wait. Those aren't the places
Rage was talking about. Rage was talking
about people from Africa, and The Great Replacement
is all about diagrams of maps full of
little black people, overwhelming little white people,
and websites pushing it tell
lies about native women being encouraged
to procreate with African men.
This Telegraph article is scaremongering
about very different groups from the current
targets, who tend to be from more
brown, Muslim-y countries.
That's because Rage is citing an article
from 2013, back when the immigration
restrictions were set to be lifted, and
many totally smart people feared
we'd be flooded so heavily with
Romanians and Bulgarians
that the country would literally collapse back
into the ocean from the added weight,
which, as we all know, literally happened.
Just kidding. This reasonable
rational thinker who thinks they've out-scienced
Bill Nye tried to scaremonger
about immigration from the wrong place
than the one they're talking about
by citing the headline of a three-year-old article
that all but admits it's completely
misrepresenting the actual data a few
paragraphs in. Hey, look!
I think we figured out why she didn't bother linking
it in the description. Also note that
when she does show the text of the article,
it's blurred, so you can't pause it
and check to see how heavily
distorted the article is being
with the truth. Weird how she
knew to do that.
Almost as if she knows the source is full of shit,
but didn't think anyone
would bother to check.
Now, if you're anything like me, and I certainly hope
not, you're probably wondering why,
of all the articles to cite about
immigration and overpopulation,
why she would pick such an old one
scaremongering about immigration from a different
place? Like, why of all things
would this article or its data
form the basis for her claims?
Let's assume that you're gullible and you've been
tricked into believing the lie that foreigners
are coming to outbreed you, and you're so
sure it's right that you don't feel the need to do
any research, but you know you need to look
like you did to seem credible, so you'd
need a news story to flash up that looks
like it supports you. How would you find
an article that suits your needs? Well,
if it was me, I would Google something
ridiculous like, too many foreign
babies, and pick the one with the most
attention-getting headline that also looks like
it did some actual statistical
analysis. You know, like maybe the fourth
one down, even. This attitude to
science, studies, information,
and facts is probably
one of the many reasons why Rage and others
found Nye's recent work so baffling.
It appears that many people, without ever actually
checking anything, have already decided
what the truth is about issues of
gender, or immigration, or global
warming. Speaking of denying the
science of climate change, I made a joke
about Steven Crowder in the last video, and a
bunch of people went,
ooh, is he gonna do Crowder next?
And I hate to disappoint my
fan, so let's take
a look at some of Stevie's work about Nye's
recent work.
That's an awful—retake that. Let's have a look at some
of Stevie's recent work about Nye's
recent—I said—I did it again.
I've saved myself the job of really having to
go through his claims about the gender episode, because
I've covered all the main ones already,
and as we've already covered, these people
have a habit of repeating each other's points.
He was—he was—he's making the case that
gender exists on a spectrum. By the way, very different if you go back
to his old show, he did say that chromosomes determine gender.
If you go back to the episodes when we were a kid.
So he's done a one-eighth down there.
So instead, I'll point out that his real beef
with Nye comes from how Bill's vocal about
climate change and doing something about it,
and Crowder is sure that the science doesn't
support man-made climate change, and he has
some counter-arguments that he's sure are good.
And then you have evidence, and the evidence
disagrees with your worldview, so you deny
the evidence, and then along with that,
you deny the authorities that are providing
the evidence. You will not deny the
authorities. Now, we're going to be talking—
Eee! A talk in a
German voice authoritarian joke.
Why, that's almost as good
as knowing the science!
Uh, who wants to take a bet with me that
at some point, he's recently made a video
accusing the left of calling everyone
Nazis and how unproductive that is?
Just kidding. I've seen more than
one of his videos, so I know he does that.
The left has been so busy
calling everyone Nazis.
Who would dare invoke
needless comparison to the Nazis?
What sort of imbecile
would dare do
something like that? Ah, no,
he's just talking authoritatively in a
German voice. That's not necessarily
invoking comparison to the Nazis
for political points.
Completely unrelatedly, just, you know,
nothing to do with the last sentence,
here's a segment from a video that he did
about Nye on climate change.
Now, everybody, science is
political. Science is political.
Incorrect. First, let me
draw your attention to the definition of science.
The intellectual and
practical activity... Oh my god.
I forgot that he actually cites
the dictionary definition of science
to try and avoid
accepting the basic fact that, like,
in order to stop the world from
melting down, scientists might
have to try and influence policy.
Wait, wait, wait, no, this gets worse, doesn't it?
Merging politics and science, not allowing
them to exist autonomously of each other
can only serve to alter
science's trajectory to the path of truth.
Okay? That's the main purpose here, and
Nye wants that specifically. Some examples?
I know it seems tired and old hat, but
let's go to Nazi Germany. That's kind of
a prime example of political science.
It also, of course, led to guessing
a few individuals.
You heard me right. If scientists try
to make the government listen to the
effects of global warming and do something about it,
it's the same as the Holocaust.
With Steven Crowder, it's honestly
a laugh a minute, watching him flip-flop between
comparing everyone he doesn't like to the Nazis
and their genocides, and complaining
that way too many people are comparing
things to the Nazis nowadays, especially those
leftists, who are the only ones
that do it.
But where are the other scientists speaking up?
Kind of like with Islam.
You know, we say, where are the Muslims speaking up
against the acts of terrorism? Not only against terrorism—
Weird how in the same video, where Crowder
goes from saying how dangerous
political science was to the Jews,
he then, for seemingly no reason,
decides to start spreading the,
like, legit lie that
Muslims don't condemn terror attacks.
You know, I expected this video to
contain lies about Bill Nye and the science.
I did not expect it to contain lies
about Muslims. I guess when you
only have two talking points, you gotta
find a way to fit them in somehow, right?
You know, Steve, there are many gigantic lists
out there of Muslims and Muslim groups
that have come out against so-called
Islamic terror.
But I can't think of a single Muslim who's condemned
global warming. Coincidence?
Where are the Muslims speaking up
against the acts of terrorism?
It's very weird how he has to keep
quibbling about nonsense
instead of easily debunking
the data he says can be easily
debunked. And when he really does
get around to trying to actually debunk
climate science, when he's not saying
people wanting to do something about it are
Nazis, he's doing such a poor job
of debunking it that you don't even need
me to show you the flaws in his understanding.
Even racists can accept
climate change is a problem that begs a solution.
"...problem when it comes to climate change."
Yes, I agree that climate change
is an actual problem, and it needs to be
sorted out, and we do need to sort out
the consummation of electricity,
and then— I'm honestly really
quite stunned that in the middle of
a video complaining about the
bisexual agenda, spreading
racist lies,
scaremongering about immigration,
and whose description has to defend
the fact that she says Bill Nye
has a Jewish nose,
Lady Stormfront
still manages to have a better stance
on climate change than Stephen Crowder.
That's the lowest bar I've
ever seen, and
Crowdy Wowdy has just tripped
over it, and fallen into a well.
And it's not just rage that puts Crowder
to shame. If you want to see his claims get debunked
in more detail, there are many good videos
out there by the, uh, seminal
and personally inspirational Potholer54,
and—
Armored Skeptic?!
...
Aw, that's right!
We just came full circle!
...the Antarctic ice sheet showed a net gain
of 112 billion
tons of ice per year—
But you didn't mention that there's also a net
loss for the entire planet.
Greenland also has a
major ice sheet. The total net
ice loss for Greenland is an
average of 269
billion tons of ice
every year. So the planet suffers
a net loss of
147 billion
tons of ice every year.
You see, Skeptic was wrong
about most of the issues he brought up about
Nye's show, because he doesn't really have
a grasp of the related science. But he's
right enough about climate science to know
Crowder's full of shit. The truly interesting
thing about Skeptic and those like him is
that if you pay attention, you can quite
easily discern the places where they've actually
decided to employ reason and
skepticism and proper fact-checking,
and the places where a sort of
party line has formed of the same
arguments repeating themselves over and over, but
no one's really thought about the
issue in that much detail. For
these people, ignoring the latter and the parts where
they just kind of complain about the SJWs,
the former can actually be quite
informative and interesting. Not
always, but quite often. This
schism is interesting, and the solution
isn't all that hard. It actually just means employing
reason and skepticism, but
even more, about even more
things. It would be nice if
he acknowledged the existence of
my video criticising him, or
even tried to respond
at all to the points
in it, but I know how long
this kind of thing can take. You've got to pick
what you cover with your time very carefully, or
nothing gets done, and I certainly can't criticise
anyone for doing what they think is right
with the time they have. For example, I've
spent nearly two months of my life
reading data and
biology books
and studies about trans
people, and reading about the lived
experiences of being trans in order to
come to a better understanding before broaching this
topic and responding to criticism,
before realising that most of the criticism
didn't do any research, and
there was really no reason
for me to do most of that reading,
and I've had basically no
chances to show all the work
I did in this video, and I'm thoroughly
disappointed in myself.
I accidentally took the time to educate
myself, to no benefit other than
my own personal expansion of knowledge,
like some kind of loser who
thinks that's important, and
to think I did all that just
to respond to videos
covering an episode of a show that I didn't think
was very good at covering the issues anyway.
I want to close by focusing on a section
of that episode that a lot of people complained
about, probably because it rightfully made them
feel uncomfortable, because
it made me feel a bit uncomfortable too.
So I'm gonna ask for a little help with that, and who
better to talk about sex than two
cis male
white guys?
It sat with me because I really
can't avoid what it's pointing out.
I can talk all day about whatever the right way
to discuss or present these issues might be,
but at the end of that day, I will still
be an outsider to those issues.
I was deeply curious what the opinion
of someone who's actually affected by these issues
might be about the show, so
I reached out to trans YouTuber Zinnia Jones
for her perspective on the issues, and
she sent me this. Let's watch.
Hi, I'm Zinnia Jones.
I'm a trans woman, and I've been
covering transgender issues on YouTube
for several years. Personally,
I enjoyed Bill Nye's presentation
of the spectrum of gender and sexuality.
As a trans person, I've often found coverage
of these topics for a cisgender audience
to be oversimplified or
awkward, but this episode
was surprisingly painless and even
charming, and it offered a nuanced
explanation of human diversity that's
sadly lacking in most media.
I was glad to see such a high-profile presentation
of concepts that I and other
trans advocates have been raising
awareness of for years, such as
the decoupling of gender from sex
and the recognition of non-binary genders.
The use of gender expression
in South Korea's culture was
a great concrete example of how
our ideas about gender can be actively
shaped by societal influences,
and I felt that the ice cream segment
was pretty effective in connecting
sexuality to something that people can
viscerally understand in their lives.
Being told that your favorite flavor of ice cream
is wrong would
make no sense, and as they
depicted, the people who feel the need
to try and rewrite their sexual orientation
do tend to end up
in some very queer situations.
As someone who loved watching Bill Nye
as a kid, I'll admit it was a bit strange
to hear a song about handjobs
and powerbombs, but
on the whole, I think this episode is
a good introduction for people who may
not be aware of what we now know
about the full range of gender and sexuality.
Um.
When I
went to find an alternative
perspective, I
had kind of banked on it
kind of semi-resembling the one
I'd had. Like, it would have been
really convenient for me if I could end the video
with, hey, remember what I thought about
the episode? Well, here's someone who knows way more
about the issue, and they agree with me!
But no, it turns out my perspective
can be flawed. I think Zinnia makes
an interesting point that I completely missed.
Ultimately, Bill Nye's doing
what Bill Nye has always done. Provide
a rudimentary, baseline explanation
of a topic to an audience whose science
education may well have ended in high
school. Like when we discussed
the act of writing an episode of this
show earlier, pointing this out
puts a lot of this episode in perspective.
Nye's show is for such a broad audience
of folks who may not know anything
about the topic. In a way,
the only people who this episode isn't
for are people who already
think a lot about the topic,
people who live the topic because it's a part
of their daily lives, and
of course, people who think that by
simply thinking about this issue too
much, you've taken the wrong side
in a culture war, something
something liberal agenda, blah
blah, too pro-gay.
Now, at this point, I am
contractually obliged to mention that exposure
to this video directly may make you up to
15% more gay, so
it's highly recommended that you wear your
ideological protection goggles provided
underneath your si—hang on a second.
Why is this written at the end of the script?
Hey there, thanks for watching.
I'd like to thank Horikawa Otone for
letting me butcher her name like that
and also for help with the research that went
into making this video. If there's any mistakes,
it's because I forgot to run them past her.
I'd also like to thank Zinnia Jones for recording
her contribution, that was very nice of her,
and also ContraPoints for recording that one
line, which she did on incredibly short
notice, like the day before this video was
gonna come out. Thank you very much for that, Contra.
Most of the music used in this video,
including the song you're hearing right now,
was created by Krista Lee from her album
Fantasy Zone, a tribute to the music of
various Sega games. It's on Bandcamp,
check it out, link in the description.
And, finally, thanks
to all my lovely patrons for enabling
me. In addition to the names going past the screen
right now, I'd especially like to thank
three-fifths of a brain,
a bunch of question marks, I hope that's not an error
on the list I made, a bowl of
creamy tomato soup, Aislinn,
Aidan Bradley, Al Swigert,
Alex Lemkevich,
Alexander R. Corbett, Alexander
Wendler, Alicia Parker Martell,
Amy Lech, Andrew
Gilly, Andrew Scheimer,
Avi Finkel, Anna S.,
Bee Movie, but every time they say Bee, I donate
ten dollars to Hbomberguy, Benjamin
Davidson, Bisotton Jenny,
Big Boy, Big Fan,
Brennan Arts, Burrett Plouffe,
Cal Ashton, Caleb
McMurphy, Christopher McDonald,
Christopher Wade,
Kieran, Klausu,
Kabisa, Commissar Taco,
Corwin Light-Williams, Daniel
Han, Daniel Stewart,
Daniel Sullivan, Daniel
Vincent Chilton, Dash of Weak,
Dave Kemp, David Craggs,
David Rose, David the Benevolent
Malevolence, Davis Remy,
Donald Drumpf should have a cactus
forcibly inserted into his rectum,
Eden Yankovic-Sumar,
Aidan Goldstrom, Elijah Scanlon,
Elliot Soden,
Eric Hunter, Eugene Butler,
Evan Ritchie,
Fully Automated Luxury Post-Scarcity
Communism, Feliz Den,
Femininja,
Findley Bowick-Copley, George
Soros, Gar Internet,
Garrett Lathy, Garrett Mitchell,
Gary Marshall,
Geeky Apar, Get Dunked On,
Gnostic Dude,
Grafen Blackpaw, Gracie Lipscomb,
Hbomberguy-But-With-Yowie-Hands,
Handsome Unlimited,
Heba Asad,
Heretic Void,
Hero of Time 88,
Hi, I'm Hbomberguy, and I love
breaded mac and cheese. Ah, you think you're so
clever. Hero Reward,
I don't know, like a butt or
something. I'm Neapolitan.
I'm Daddy's Little Bitch.
Seriously though, I'm trapped inside of a
Ian Weaklock Scott.
It turns out I was wrong about everything.
Jack Harvey, Jacqueline
Merritt, Jakucha Boris,
James, James Adair,
James Id,
Jan Anders Bremer, Jan
actually had to send me a recording of him pronouncing
his name for me to get it right. I've been pronouncing his
name wrong for like a year. I'm
so sorry, Jan. Jason Derso,
Jason Walter,
Jeffrey Theobald, Jenny Angel,
Jeremy, Jerry Terry,
Joe, Joe Haynes,
Joe Cantwell, Jordan Barrett,
Jordan Tullis, Justin
Conkerbeard, Justin Partridge,
Justin Schwendeman,
Kay Played Dota.
Congratulations on getting over your addiction.
Kaffzile, Katherine Wild,
Katherine, Kelly Mariella
Kay, Kevin Thurber,
Kiki329, Kit Foley,
Klil H. Nyori,
Kurt C. Yost, Lauren,
Lewis Woodrow, Lucas
Cocon, Luke Swanson,
Max Barbecue King,
Mackenzie Cockerill,
Marco Shard, Mark Harmon,
Matthew Harris, McArthur,
Michael H. Prey,
Michael Jackson's Children's Hospital, biggest
children's hospital in the wo-
Mike Stanley, Minty Freakin' Fresh
except now she's old enough to legally drink
alcohol, Momi,
John Silferplatz-Tunstrum,
Naoto Shirogane, Nathan Hoare,
Nathan and Bronwyn,
never tickle a wookie's sphincter unless you're
wearing rubber gloves, Niflet
with three Ts, Nilti Axe
Dealer of Souls,
Owen Piper, Patrick the Breezy
P. Finnegan, Paul Lasswell,
Philip Coffey, Prokor,
Rebecca Harold, Rebecca
Washam, Recovering Zombie,
Ree Mansell, René
Larchaug, Richard Pearson,
Ricard Hevosmar, Riley
Van Dyke, Robert Phillips,
Rosetti, Rosie Forbes,
Roux, Ryan
Van Shark, Ryan William Cox,
Sam Bayliss,
Samael, Sammy J,
Samuel Butler, Scott
Gertin, Sean Kemp,
Shadowbag, Sean Higgins,
Sheena Artrip,
Siegfried, Slayer of the Immortal Dragon,
Silas Pumpkins,
Syntharama, Sol,
Spunker McGraw, Starman
Nabby, Stephen Cohn,
Talash, Tapio
Unto Oscari Taronan,
Thadwa Zalewski, The Almighty Quackasaurus,
The Frankfurt
Shoal, The Joke
Daddy, The Spectre of
Communism, Thomas Kistner,
Threnody, Tom Martell,
Torin Schofield,
Totally Radical Politics,
Tyler Howard,
Ure, Vagabond to be,
Vandella Ridbeck,
Wagablesmith, Wackman,
Wiebke, Wouter de Hoogt,
xxx underscore
swagmaster420 underscore
xxx, Zachary Clark,
Zoe Britton, Zoe
Gawin, Chiboi Kamikensai,
Devon's Hands Melt,
don't forget to subscribe to the official
Doctor Who YouTube channel,
Hortdog, Lissy Roberts,
Parker Anderson,
Rikami, Robbie Fox,
several rats participating in an
elaborate and daring casino heist,
Supercalor Nihilistic
Expialidocious, The God Forsaken
Strongest Rat Alive,
why are there always rats at the end of the credits?
Willow H., Zodak,
and Ace Jenny.
It's good to be back.
Oh, fuck.
That was a complete accident.
Shit.
Are you okay, Mr. Skeleton?
I'm okay.
I'm okay.
I'm okay.
I'm okay.
I'm okay.
I'm okay.
I'm okay.
I'm okay.
I'm okay.
That was completely unscripted.
I did not do that on purpose.
It just fell down.
Jesus.
