Hey, remember, like, six months ago when we were like, hey everyone, you should read The
Girl with All the Gifts for our next review?
Uh-huh.
It's so much time since, but happy Galentine's Day.
Galentine's Day!
Yes!
Yay!
Yay!
For this book that features a lot of dynamic female characters.
And how.
And how.
So, let's see, what are we drinking today?
Well, in the spirit of Galentine's, um, we've gotten a very red, bloody-like drink.
See, I was going for the spirit of, like, Greek-themed.
Oh, well, that too.
Greek-themed things.
Oh, pomegranates.
I get it.
Well, maybe six months ago.
We've invited our friend Lindsay Rebar, who many of you may remember from when Lindsay
and Lisa reviewed her book.
It's called The Art of Wishing, and the second one is The Fourth Wish.
Go buy them.
I don't know.
Am I supposed to say that?
Yeah, you should.
Go buy them.
Pimp your wares.
We've invited her to join us because, um, this is one of those books where we all liked
it so much, this is going to be an otherwise really boring review, unless we focus on something
else.
Yeah.
The thing is, while I was reading it, I didn't think about structure at all because I just
wanted to know what happened next.
This is my contribution to the squeeing about this book, is there's nothing wrong with it.
I loved it.
I don't know anything about it.
It was perfect, yeah.
It was awesome.
Oh my god.
So, um, should we explain the base of it?
Yeah, we should probably.
What's the book about?
It's a zombie book.
Surprise.
Yeah, which is a little weird in and of itself for me because I am not a fan of zombie literature
or zombie anything really.
I think I've said this before in previous videos, but zombie stories are pretty much
the guilt-free story because you can have the bad guy that you don't have to think about
their motive or anything.
It's about survival, so you instantly have, well, there is your drama right there.
You don't have to think about it.
Even though in a lot of zombie things they try to make it, well, it's not about the zombies,
it's about the humans and how humanity falls apart.
It takes place on this sort of like science bunker.
So, while there are the mindless zombies, we also have these, you know, kids and they're
all children who for some reason have like mental capacity, sometimes genius level, as
in the case with our protagonist, Melanie.
And so basically it's like on this science camp trying to, you know, figure out why they
be the way they be.
And on the one hand we have the teacher character who is, you know, a woman.
She's awesome, I love her.
And she kind of sees them as little, you know, people, which they are.
And, you know, she's the teacher and they all really like her and they like learning
because they're kids.
But then there are like other characters, like the sergeant.
He's a huge racist against zombies and he doesn't see them as people.
And then there, of course, is like the Dr. Caldwell who is just like this sort of...
She's the mad scientist who is going to save humanity by not having any more children.
She's going to science the shit out of this.
And she's also a she.
It's like, so like our three main characters, like we were shocked to find out that this
wasn't written by a woman because like the three main characters are women.
It's like, you know, the moral center, Justino.
The mad scientist.
You never see female mad scientists.
Heartless female mad scientist.
Yeah, the girl with all the gifts, Melanie.
And she's what, ten years old?
Yeah, she's like ten-ish.
This is a ten-year-old zombie as the main character.
Yeah.
And I identified with her a little more than I should have.
And it's an adult book too.
Yeah.
Yeah, but what I also enjoyed is, you know, these characters start as you think characters
you've seen all before.
And then they all get those little twists that make them human.
And not just, well, here's the racist surgeon.
And here's the mad scientist lady who's...
And then our other guy who was obviously just brought in to die.
Well, yeah.
It's like the first day on the force.
It was his first day.
Yeah, there's other five main characters.
One of them is a red shirt.
See, that was something I could see coming.
It was like, the author clearly does not care about this story.
My favorite part of that was the character thought coming too.
He was like, I was kind of brought into this book to die.
And then he died.
And he's like, I knew it.
Hey, spoilers.
But then even with...
A lot of character death.
Justine.
Or Miss Justine.
Justine, I don't know.
Just, you know.
What I love is that it sets it, like, you think, oh, well here's the woman who can't
help but empathize with the scary bad thing.
And then it's like, but then her foil is also a woman.
Oh, my gosh.
And they do all start as archetypes.
And I found it a little Joss Whedon-y in that way, where everybody's a little
deeper than you thought they were in ways that you wouldn't necessarily expect.
But also, like, the fact that their gender-ness never comes into play as a
function in the story.
Yeah.
You know?
It's like the gender of, like, their gender is completely irrelevant.
And that's what we say when we just don't want cliché female characters.
It's like, especially in a story like this, it's just like so-and-so happens to
be a woman and, you know, is not acting in a stereotypical way vis-a-vis what
type of roles women are normally allowed to play in stories like these.
And I don't, like, I don't know how much we should talk about it because it's,
like, part of what made this book so, like, as close to flawless as a book is
going to get is that the payoff at the end was so perfectly built up and yet so
not predictable.
You know?
There's this point, and I think I can say this in a spoiler-free way, but there
is this point in the book about two or three pages from the end where you
realize that you're two or three pages from the end.
There is no satisfying way that this story could wrap up.
And, like, then it does in a way that I didn't see coming.
I'm sure there's somebody out there saying, oh, yeah, I totally saw that
coming.
Whatever.
No, you didn't.
Not only is it the perfect ending, but it also turns the entire rest of the
story retroactively into a completely different story than the one you thought
you were reading without making you feel cheated in the process.
Yes.
That kind of, like, perfectly sums up, like, why this went from just, like, good
adventure story.
I want to know what happens next to holy shit, you know?
It wasn't even a twist ending, because it wasn't.
No, it wasn't at all.
It was, like, damn.
You know?
And it really does invert that whole idea of in a zombie story where it's, like,
well, obviously the humans are the good, and this should survive.
Reading it, I ended up comparing a lot of it to The Last of Us, which is a
video game super popular.
You might not have heard of it.
I've heard of it.
I'm hip to the jazz.
The things that in my mind were comparing between the two was that they're very
intimate, small stories in a way, as much as there's a lot of travel and there
are big implications going on in the background.
I found myself comparing the ending choice between our main male character in
the video game versus our young female character in the book, and the book does
it so much better.
Do they do similar things?
They do, where there's a choice, not to get into spoilers, but there is a huge
choice to make, and the implication is the doom or, say, salvation of humanity.
And in the video game, I saw his choice coming.
In the book, I didn't.
And they're called Hungries in this book, which that's something I'm not a huge
fan of.
I don't know.
Well, I kind of was because I didn't go into this knowing that it was a zombie
book.
I was sent it by a friend, the same friend that introduced me and this other
Lindsay, and she was like, oh, you'll love this book.
I'm not telling you anything about it.
And so I was just like, meh, sure, and picked it up eight months later or
whatever it was.
I did the same thing.
Hey!
Because it was a zombie book.
And the camera, as it were, opens the story in such tight focus that you don't
actually see what's going on.
You actually think that you're reading a story about this girl who's an abused
captive or something like that, but it turns out they're just restraining her
because they're afraid she'll eat everyone, which is a legitimate fear.
Yeah.
And it slowly expands until you see what the base is and how it functions.
I'm not a huge, it just feels kind of unnatural to me when we must rename
things that are like, you know.
Where if it actually happened everyone would be like, yeah, they're zombies.
And then they were the zombies.
You know, it's like that was one thing that really kind of.
This one.
Oh.
This one that I really was not wild about was the fact that the aliens were
called the others.
And it's just like, no, they'd be called the fucking aliens.
It's like, come the fuck on, you know?
I haven't actually read that.
I didn't know.
Yeah, they're just like, oh no, it's an other.
It's like, it's an alien.
You would not say an other.
Yeah.
It's like, you would either name the species or you would call it a fucking
alien.
You know.
That's kind of how I felt about The Hungries.
I'm like, you would either give it a species name or you would call it a
fucking zombie because that's what it is.
I did actually.
I thought of Feed by Mira Grant, which is my all-time.
It's up there.
It's up there.
Hey, there it is.
My all-time favorite zombie horror series.
If you want zombie comedy, My Life is a White Trash Zombie by Diana
Rowland.
Go read it.
But zombie horror series, that one, they have all of the references.
All the references that we do.
Everybody cites Dawn of the Dead as the quintessential zombie movie because
that's the mythology that's closest to what actually happened.
As a result, everybody in the next generation of kids is suddenly named
George after George Romero, the savior of humanity, who taught us how to
fight zombies.
But we don't really get that in The Girl with All the Gifts.
They're Hungries and they're totally new for some reason.
I mean, for me it would work if we were just referring to the children that
way because not wanting to say the zombie word in front of them in case
they pick up on it.
Yeah.
I could see it being a code within the book.
Or to differentiate them from the adults who are the needless zombies.
But that's not the case.
Yeah.
Part of the reason we're being so vague about it is we know there are people
who haven't read it.
Normally we'll talk spoilers, but I don't want to with this book.
Yeah.
So definitely if you haven't read it yet, go out and read it.
Go.
Go forth.
Enjoy it.
Come back to the comments.
Tell us what you think.
If you haven't read it, come to the comments.
What did you think?
If you haven't read it, beware the comments.
But gush with us once you come back and read it.
That was my main takeaway with this book.
I'd never seen such a perfectly set up ending that was not predictable.
And I feel like even in saying that, it's kind of spoilery, but it is what it is.
Don't worry.
Just go for the ride.
You're going to love it and then you're going to cry.
And then if you're like us, you're going to be like,
I'll never write anything as good as this.
Yeah.
Well, and then you go to your computer and you delete everything you've ever written
and you start burning manuscripts.
Nope.
Nope.
I literally did that.
How did you know?
Kawhi bought it.
It's like I'm canceling my contract.
I'm not doing this anymore.
I'm back.
Well, speaking of other books, would you like to recommend next week's book?
I would.
I would.
Where is it?
Behind the iPad.
The next book that I don't think I'm reviewing, but I would if you guys would have me back.
Oh, yeah.
It would be like another gush fest.
Oh, yeah, totally, is my favorite book of 2014 that wasn't written by a friend of mine.
Although if you're A.S. King and you're watching this and you want to be my friend,
let's totally make that happen because holy shit.
This is called Glory O'Brien's History of the Future,
and it is amazing and feminist and literary without being pretentious, which I love.
Yeah, it's a gorgeous, gorgeous book.
Okay, so for the one after that, we're going to put it up to a vote.
Based on your suggestions on Twitter, we were going to do some graphic novels.
Believe it or not, there is no Transformers in here.
Next time.
Maybe one day.
Yeah, we wanted mainly either female-centric or female protagonists.
We only asked for ones that had trade paperbacks out just so it could be more book-like.
So here are your three options.
Go into the comments and vote for one, and then we will announce it when we review this book,
Glory O'Brien's History of the Future.
So your three options are Rat Queens, volume one through something.
Ms. Marvel, volume—I think there's only one.
Or, of course, Saga, which is up to volume five or six or something.
We're going to read the three Sagas.
We're going to read the three, and then we'll talk about it.
Basically, we'll just say whatever's on trade.
That's what we're going to talk about.
Although I'm going to go ahead and catch up on Ms. Marvel because number 12 is coming out tomorrow,
and Loki's the special guest, so we've got to see that.
So vote for which of the three, Ms. Marvel, Saga, or Rat Queens you want us to talk about,
and then we will announce it when we review this sucker.
Depending on how well the voting goes, we might do that from now on.
Hey. Hey, Lindsay. I'm really mad for you.
Oh, I've lost my mind over you.
We'll talk about—oh, yeah, and also—
I think this is a reference to another book we read one time.
Deja vu?
Yeah.
You should talk about our book one day.
Oh my god, yes.
This is from me to you.
Which also, by the way, of course, keep sending us your comments about what you want to see
in a live-in book two of the Viridian Saga,
as we are now fleshing out the outline for Realsies.
Yes, we are for Realsies. We're working on it, I promise.
All right, well, thank you so much for joining us, Other Lindsay.
Thank you for having me, and for the drinks.
I'm going to take this faster.
I'm savoring it.
And so we look forward to your comments, and we will see you next time.
We'll see you next time.
