Hello internet.
In my last video about Pluto you may have noticed that I said aloud the names of every
planet except one.
This one.
And that was no accident but rather the result of careful script editing because where I
grew up I learned that the name of the seventh planet is pronounced Uranus.
Of course to a kid Uranus sounds an awful lot like Uranus which is how I and everyone
else I knew ended up saying the name which is funny when you're a child but becomes a
bit of a problem when you grow up and try to teach scientific facts about the planet.
For example Uranus has a ring around it.
Astronomers have discovered a dark spot on Uranus.
Uranus is a gas giant.
Uranus is surrounded by methane.
There is a solution to this problem.
The alternative pronunciation of the name which goes Uranus.
And most scientists in public roles do use this pronunciation.
But for me Uranus is still problematic.
Sure it's better than Uranus but it's still Uranus.
And perhaps I'm just childish but when someone else says Uranus I still hear Uranus in my
head and it just draws more attention to the unfortunate name.
The tragedy is it didn't have to be this way.
The seventh planet from the Sun is unique because it's the first planet we discovered.
For all of human history the six closest planets were big enough or bright enough to see with
just our limited simian eyes.
But the next planet was too dim to see until our telescope technology got good enough for
British astronomer William Herschel to spot it in 1781.
Understandably though he didn't think he'd discovered a new planet since from the rise
of modern humans 50,000 years earlier until that Tuesday no one ever had.
But discover he did and so choose a name he must.
And Herschel being the good subject of the crown that he was christened his new planet
the Georgium Sidus which means the Georgian Star.
And the George in that Georgian Star was King George III the reigning monarch.
While King George liked the name the rest of the world did not and decided that perhaps
Herschel wasn't the best guy to name the new planet after all and quickly decided to come
up with alternatives of their own.
One suggestion was Neptune which is confusing to us now but at the time the planet that
would become Neptune had not yet been found.
A more obvious alternative was to name the planet Herschel after the man who discovered
it.
Even in Great Britain the name the Georgium Sidus proved a bit stuffy for some so variants
like the Georgian planet or just Georgium were also used.
Though never as you might have heard George.
Side note here while researching this video I found a lot of websites claiming that the
seventh planet was almost named George but I was never able to find a primary source
for this.
As best I could tell searching through documents from the time no one ever suggested this name.
I checked with the Royal Institution who since 1799 has been promoting science awesomeness
from the heart of London and whose videos you should now go watch.
And they confirmed the name George was never on the table because to so casually refer
to the king at the time would have been disrespectful.
And disrespecting a monarch is never a good idea.
Especially one who is slowly losing his mind from a genetic disorder.
But that's a story for another time.
Anyway another real suggestion for the new planet's name came from Johann Bode who suggested
the Greek god of the sky.
When a colleague of Bode discovered the 92nd element in 1789 he named it Uranium to support
Bode's choice and try and end the debate.
Perhaps because these two were German it might not have occurred to them how the word would
eventually be corrupted in English.
Though it's also hard to know how English speakers in the 1780s and 90s would have pronounced
the name.
But since the word Anus was in the language then it seems unlikely that this particular
pronunciation would have been popular.
It may also have been pronounced with a flat A to sound like Uranus or something more like
the Greek name Uranus.
These names competed with each other over decades.
For example still in 1823 the Encyclopedia Britannica lists the planet as Herschel, notes
the alternative names and then proceeds to carefully word the rest of the article to
avoid naming the planet again.
But you dear modern viewer know that eventually these alternatives faded and left this name
triumphant.
Which leaves someone like me with my terrible pronunciation longing for history to have
taken a different path.
The name Herschel might have made the planet sound a bit like a boring accountant rather
than the very interesting planet it actually is.
But this would still be a much better name than what we have.
Neptune is obviously a fine planetary name though picking this might have just delayed
the problem.
Finally, the George M.Citus is a bit awkward and in sillier moments I wish that Herschel
had just been more direct and named it King George.
Because how fun would that make it to teach kids the list of planets today?
Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, King George and Neptune.
In classrooms such an unusual name would change the planet from a thing to avoid to a starting
point for discussions about what makes that planet different and how astronomy and our
view of the universe change and progress over time.
But my impractical dreams aside, we're stuck with this name.
Which for me means choosing between the pronunciation which comes naturally and is terrible or the
unnatural awkward one which is still unsatisfactory.
So what's a man to do?
In the end probably follow the lead of the encyclopedia Britannica and avoid the name
when possible which is a sad fate for the planet in our solar system with such an interesting
story to tell.
Uranus.
Uranus.
Uranus.
Uranus.
Uranus.
Uranus.
Seriously people, could we at least agree to switch the pronunciation back to the Greek
Uranus?
It's clearly so much better.
